
   Home » Policy on ableism and discrimination based on disability » 8.
   Duty to accommodate

Policy on ableism and discrimination based on disability
--
     * 6. Forms of discrimination
     * 7. Reprisal
     * 8. Duty to accommodate
     * 9. Undue hardship
     * 10. Other limits on the duty to accommodate
     * 11. Preventing and responding to discrimination
     * Appendix A: Purpose of this policy

8. Duty to accommodate

Page controls
--

   Organizational responsibility:
   duty to accommodate

Page content

   Under the Code, employers and unions, housing providers and service
   providers have a legal duty to accommodate the needs of people with
   disabilities who are adversely affected by a requirement, rule or
   standard. Accommodation is necessary to ensure that people with
--
     must accommodate the employee in a way that, while not causing the
     employer undue hardship, will ensure that the employee can work. The
     purpose of the duty to accommodate is to ensure that persons who are
     otherwise fit to work are not unfairly excluded where working
     conditions can be adjusted without undue hardship.
--
     The test is not whether it was impossible for the employer to
     accommodate the employee's characteristics. The employer does not
     have a duty to change working conditions in a fundamental way, but
     does have a duty, if it can do so without undue hardship, to arrange
     the employee's workplace or duties to enable the employee to do his
     or her work.^[120]

--
   education and employment).^[121]

   The duty to accommodate has both a substantive and a procedural
   component. The procedure to assess an accommodation (the process) is as
   important as the substantive content of the accommodation (the
--
   to give any thought or consideration to the issue of accommodation,
   including what, if any, steps could be taken constitutes a failure to
   satisfy the ‘procedural’ duty to accommodate.”^[123]

   In Ontario, it is clear that a failure in the procedural duty to
   accommodate can lead to a finding of a breach of the Code even if there
   was no substantive accommodation that could have been provided short of
   undue hardship. Failure to perform either component of the duty is a
   failure to carry out the duty to accommodate.^[124]

   Moreover, an organization will not be able to argue persuasively that
   providing accommodation would cause undue hardship if it has not taken
   steps to explore accommodation solutions, and otherwise fulfil the
   procedural component of the duty to accommodate.^[125]

     Example: In one case, a human rights tribunal upheld a claim of
--
8.1 Principles of accommodation

   The duty to accommodate is informed by three principles: respect for
   dignity, individualization, as well as integration and full
   participation.
--
   violation of the inherent dignity and worth of the human person.”^[127]

   The duty to accommodate people with disabilities means accommodation
   must be provided in the way that most respects the dignity of the
   person, if doing so does not cause undue hardship. Human dignity
--
   In addition to designing inclusively and removing barriers,
   organizations must respond to individual requests for accommodation.
   The duty to accommodate requires that the most appropriate
   accommodation be determined and provided, unless this causes undue

--
   expensive or less disruptive to the organization.^[150]

8.3.1 Essential duties and requirements

   Section 17 of the Code says that the right to be free from
   discrimination is not infringed if the person with a disability is
   incapable of performing or fulfilling the essential duties or
   requirements attending the exercise of the right.

   In employment, essential duties are the “vital” or “indispensable”
   aspects of someone’s job. In housing, the essential duties or
   requirements of being a tenant may include paying rent, maintaining
   one’s unit so it does not violate health and safety laws, and allowing
   other people to reasonably enjoy their premises. In the case of
   services, the “essential duties or requirements” of using a service
   will vary depending on the circumstances.

   Section 17 means that someone cannot be judged incapable of performing
   the essential duties of a job, or the essential requirements of being a
   tenant or taking part in a service, unless it can be shown that the
   person’s needs cannot be accommodated

   without undue hardship. An organization should not conclude that a
   person is unable to perform the essential duties without actually
   giving the person an opportunity to demonstrate their ability.

--

     Example: After coming back from a disability-related leave, a man
     returned to modified duties. Even though his doctor cleared him to
     go back to work full-time, his employer placed him in a lower,
     part-time position at a lower pay rate. He was eventually terminated
     from his employment. The HRTO found that the employer failed to meet
     both its procedural and substantive duty to accommodate. The
     employer violated the Code when it based its decision to place the
     employee in a lower-paying position on its belief about the
--
   necessary.^[154]

   The duty to accommodate does not require exempting a person from
   performing the essential duties of the job,^[155] requirements of the
   service, etc. In the context of employment, the duty to accommodate
   does not require an employer to fundamentally change the working
   conditions of employees, assign the essential duties of an employee
   with a disability to other employees or change the essential duties and
   requirements of a position.^[156] In these cases, a next-best solution,
   such as alternative work, may need to be found.

     Example: A delivery truck driver’s duties included loading skids of
     product onto a truck, and unloading them at his destination. He
     worked for a small operation whose staff consisted of the owner and
     his wife, a warehouse employee and the delivery truck driver. Due to
     a back injury, the driver was not able to load and unload the truck,
     an essential duty of his job. He requested light duties, preferably
     office work, or relief from loading and unloading the truck. The
     employer denied this request because there were no light duties
     available, and he could not hire an additional person to help the
     driver. The HRTO found that the duty to accommodate does not require
     an employer to assign the essential duties of an employee with a
     disability to other employees or to hire another employee to perform
     them in the employee's place. An employer is also not required to
     change the essential duties and requirements of a position so that
     an employee can meet them.^[157]

--
8.3.2.1 Alternative work

   There is a duty to accommodate a person in their pre-disability job
   wherever possible. However, it is recognized that this may not always
   be feasible. Human rights case law recognizes that employers have a
   duty to consider temporary and permanent alternative work for people
   who can no longer remain in their position even with
   accommodation.^[158] This duty includes diligently investigating
   positions and proposing job options^[159] that are within the person’s
   functional limitations.^[160]
--
   work.^[165]

   The duty to accommodate may include some workplace
   reorganization.^[166] For example, it may require employers to consider
   placing an employee with a disability into a vacant position without
--
     positions available at the company. He is generally qualified for
     one of these positions, but does not know how to use a computer
     program that is required to do the essential duties of this job. The
     employer sends the person on a training course to learn the computer
     program. The employee is then qualified for the position.

   The duty to accommodate does not require the employer to completely
   alter the essence of the contract of employment, that is, the
   employee’s duty to perform work in exchange for remuneration.^[168] The
   duty to accommodate does not require an employer to provide “make work”
   or “to create a job that is not productive or that, in the employer’s
   view, does not need to be done.”^[169] Nor is an employer required to
--

   The right of people with disabilities to return to work exists if the
   worker can fulfil the essential duties of the job after accommodation
   short of undue hardship.^[175] If a person cannot fulfil the essential
   duties of the pre-disability job, despite the employer's effort to
   accommodate short of undue hardship, the employer still has an
   obligation to canvass alternative work possibilities, as outlined
--

   Under the Code, there is no fixed rule as to how long an employee with
   a disability may be absent before the duty to accommodate has been met.
   This will depend on the ability of the employee to perform the
   essential duties of the job considering the unique circumstances of
   every absence and the nature of the employee’s condition, as well as
   circumstances in the workplace.^[176] Also important is the
--
   recur and the frequency of the absence. The employee’s prognosis and
   length of absence are also important considerations. It is more likely
   that the duty to accommodate will continue with a better prognosis,
   regardless of the length of absence.

   The duty to accommodate does not necessarily guarantee a limitless
   right to return to work.^[177] On the other hand, a return to work
   program that relies on arbitrarily selected cut-offs or that requires
--

   The Supreme Court of Canada has set out a framework for examining
   whether the duty to accommodate has been met.^[180] If prima
   facie discrimination (or discrimination on its face) is found to exist,
   a respondent must establish on a balance of probabilities that the
--
   Employment
     * allowing a flexible work schedule^[185]
     * modifying job duties^[186]
     * modifying policies
     * making changes to the building (for example, installing ramps, hand
--
   Keeping in mind that everyone experiences disability differently,
   accommodation providers are also required to educate themselves about
   the nature and impact of disabilities as part of the procedural duty to
   accommodate,^[197] and to dispel any misperceptions or stereotypes that
   employees, other tenants or service staff or users may have about
--
   poisoned environment for the person with the disability.

8.6 Duties and responsibilities in the accommodation process

   The accommodation process is a shared responsibility. Everyone involved
--
     * bear the cost of required accommodation.

   Although the person seeking accommodation has a duty to assist in
   securing appropriate accommodation that will meet their needs, they are
   not responsible for originating a solution^[208] or leading the
--
   the co-operation of the person seeking accommodation. After
   accommodation is provided, the person receiving the accommodation is
   expected to fulfil the essential duties or requirements of the job,
   tenancy, or taking part in a service.

--
   assessment.

8.6.1 Duty to inquire about accommodation needs

   In general, the duty to accommodate a disability exists for needs that
   are known or ought to be known. Organizations and persons responsible
   for accommodation are not, as a rule, expected to accommodate
--
     he was experiencing difficulties on the job due to his disability.
     Even though the man did not formally request accommodation, the HRTO
     stated “…the procedural duty to accommodate indicates that an
     employer cannot passively wait for an employee to request
     accommodation where it is aware of facts that indicate that the
     employee may be having difficulties because of disability; there is
     a duty to take the initiative to inquire in these
     circumstances.”^[215]

   Where an organization is aware, or reasonably ought to be aware, that
   there may be a relationship between a disability and someone’s job
   performance, or their abilities to fulfil their duties as a tenant or
   service user, the organization has a “duty to inquire” into that
   possible relationship before making a decision that would affect the
   person adversely.^[216] This includes providing a meaningful
--

   Where a person exhibits inappropriate behaviour due to a disability,
   employers, housing providers and service providers have a duty to
   assess each person individually before imposing measures that may
   affect the person negatively. Such measures might include prematurely
--
   and tenants that a disability-related assessment (such as a medical
   assessment) or accommodation can be provided as an option to address
   job performance issues or issues relating to fulfilling one’s duties as
   a tenant or a service user.

--

   Once disability-related needs are known, the legal onus shifts to those
   with the duty to accommodate.^[219] For example, support or referral
   through employee assistance programs (EAPs) could be the solution for
   an underlying disability.
--
   employees, tenants and service users.^[220] At the same time,
   organizations must have enough information to allow them to meet their
   duty to accommodate.

   As stated above, the person seeking accommodation is generally required
--
   accommodation in good faith.^[221] A person with a disability does not
   have to meet an onerous standard for initially communicating that a
   disability exists to trigger the organization’s duty to accommodate.
   Organizations should limit requests for information to those reasonably
   related to the nature of the limitation or restriction, to assess needs
--
     * that the person has a disability
     * the limitations or needs associated with the disability
     * whether the person can perform the essential duties or requirements
       of the job^[222], of being a tenant, or of being a service user,
       with or without accommodation
     * the type of accommodation(s) that may be needed to allow the person
       to fulfill the essential duties or requirements of the job, of
       being a tenant, or of being a service user, etc.
     * in employment, regular updates about when the person expects to
--
     sought further medical details of her condition, which she refused
     to provide. The Ontario Divisional Court stated that the co-op had a
     duty to respect the rights of its occupants under the Ontario Human
     Rights Code and to accommodate the needs of an occupant with a
     disability, to the point of undue hardship.^[223]
--
   ^[124] In Lane, supra note 6, the HRTO held at para. 150 that a failure
   to meet the procedural dimensions
   of the duty to accommodate is a form of discrimination in itself
   because it “denies the affected person
   the benefit of what the law requires: a recognition of the obligation
--
   ^[141] In VIA Rail, supra note 6, the Supreme Court of Canada stated at
   para. 186: “…while human rights principles include an acknowledgment
   that not every barrier can be eliminated, they also include a duty to
   prevent new ones, or at least, not knowingly to perpetuate old ones
   where preventable.” Organizations, including government, should design
--
   para. 31.

   ^[150] The duty to accommodate does not require an employer to promote
   an employee to a higher-level position he or she would not otherwise
   have been entitled to: Ellis v. General Motors of Canada Ltd., 2011
   HRTO 1453 (CanLII). The duty to accommodate also does not require “an
   employer to place an employee in the position that the employee
   considers ideal…”: Seguin v. Xstrata Nickel, 2012 HRTO 15 (CanLII) at
--
   [MacLeod]; Lee, supra note 122. In Ontario Liquor Board Employees’
   Union v. Ontario (Liquor Control Board of Ontario) (Di Caro), 2005
   CanLII 55204 [DiCaro] , the arbitrator stated “…the duty to accommodate
   has evolved and expanded to such an extent that today the law requires
   an employer to look far beyond the disabled employee’s own position as
--
   found that an employer had failed to accommodate an employee who had
   developed a bad back when it failed to consider what modified light
   duty work it might be able to provide on a permanent basis.

   ^[167] Metsala, supra note 158. The HRTO has identified several “best
--
   ^[170] The Code does not require an employer to schedule a second
   employee during time that an employee would normally be working alone
   where there is a need to perform duties that the employee is incapable
   of performing due to a disability: Pourasadi , supra note
   155; Perron, supra note 155; Lee, supra note 122; Re Hamilton Health
--
   permanently unfit to return to work, she was “no longer able to fulfill
   the basic obligations associated with her employment relationship for
   the foreseeable future” and for that reason the employer’s duty to
   accommodate had come to an end. The HRTO went on to state at para. 36
   that “to continue [the woman] in employment in these circumstances
--
   ^[183] Meiorin, supra note 66 at para. 65.

   ^[184] The duty to accommodate may require employers and others to
   consider modifying performance standards or productivity
   targets: Meiorin, supra note 66 at para. 65. The term “performance
--
   The central issue in determining whether or how performance standards
   should be modified is whether the standards in question are essential
   duties or requirements within the meaning of section 17 of the Code. If
   the person is unable to perform the standard, but the standard is not
   considered an essential part of the job, it can be changed or the
--
   that maximize organizational objectives. Organizations should be guided
   by objective evidence when developing or assessing qualification
   standards that they consider are essential duties or requirements. If
   an employer is considering a standard that will be widely adopted, it
   should consider the job duties of employees in different settings that
   are or would be subject to the standard and whether there is a link
   between the standard and the duties of employees: Lauzon v. Ontario
   Provincial Police, 2011 HRTO 1404 (CanLII).

--
   ^[197] In Lane, supra note 6, a case involving an employee with a
   mental health disability, the HRTO stated at para. 144: “The procedural
   dimensions of the duty to accommodate required those responsible to
   engage in a fuller exploration of the nature of bipolar disorder and to
   form a better informed prognosis of the likely impact of his condition
--
   ^[198] See Dawson, supra note 33 at paras. 243-245.

   ^[199] See section 8.6.1 of this Policy on “Duty to inquire about
   accommodation needs” for information on when an organization is
   expected to inquire about accommodation needs, even when a person may
   not have made a specific request.

   ^[200] In Baber, supra note 12, the HRTO found that even if the duty to
   accommodate was triggered,
   the employer had fulfilled its duty to accommodate because Ms. Baber
   failed to co-operate in the accommodation process by refusing
   reasonable requests for information that would confirm her needs. She
   consistently refused to provide the necessary medical information. The
   HRTO found that the employer did not breach its duty to accommodate her
   when it terminated her employment.

--
   establishing a disability and outlining the accommodation needs on the
   applicant. It is the OHRC’s position that the procedural component of
   the duty to accommodate – which includes obtaining all relevant
   information and considering how to accommodate – includes a
   responsibility to pay the costs necessary to facilitate accommodation,
--
     generally the focus should be on the functional limitations of the
     employee’s condition (capacities and symptoms) and how those
     functional aspects interact with the workplace duties and
     environment. Consequently, an employer need not be informed of the
     specific cause of the employee’s condition or the exact diagnosis in
--
   disability…may not know the exact nature and extent of that disability
   at the time they are experiencing the symptoms. In such circumstances,
   we cannot impose a duty to disclose a conclusive medical diagnosis.”
   Some people may present with a set of symptoms, but without a specific
   diagnosis. See Ball, supra note 56.
