
    1. Home
    2. Alcohol duties
    3. UK Trade Tariff: excise duties, reliefs, drawbacks and allowances

     * HM Revenue
--
   Guidance

UK Trade Tariff: excise duties, reliefs, drawbacks and allowances on or
before 31 July 2023

--
   11. 11. Climate Change Levy
   12. 12. Biofuels
   13. 13. Reliefs from excise duty
   14. 14. Excise drawbacks and allowances

--
   This publication is available at
   https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-trade-tariff-excise-dutie
   s-reliefs-drawbacks-and-allowances/uk-trade-tariff-excise-duties-relief
   s-drawbacks-and-allowances

1. Introduction

   This part concentrates on goods liable to excise duty. It lists the
   rates of excise duty chargeable for the following:
     * wine and made-wine
     * beer
--
     * biofuels

   Use this guide with the Trade Tariff: look up commodity codes, duty and
   VAT rates to help with commodity code numbers (for example, 2204 10 11
   for certain wines).

   This part also contains some information and reference about excise
   drawback and excise duty reliefs.

1.1 Important note on definitions

   The definitions used in this part are those prescribed for excise duty
   purposes only.

1.2 Background

   Excise duty is chargeable, in addition to any customs duty which may be
   due, on the goods described in this part. These goods may be either of
   UK origin, received in the UK following an intra EU movement or
   imported from outside the UK or EU.

   The duty falls due at the time when the goods leave any duty suspension
   arrangements, that is when:
     * they are released for consumption or otherwise made available for
--
   addition to the commodity description and code number each excisable
   item has allocated a tax type code number (for example, 451 for
   spirits). These identify the type and rate of excise duty payable. They
   are included in the tables listed in section Wine and made-wine. UK
   Trade Tariff: Box 47(a) tax type codes also lists tax codes which are
--
   strengths measured by reference to the following percentages of alcohol
   at a temperature of 20°C).
   Class or description Tax type code Rate of excise duty
   Sparkling exceeding 5.5% ABV but less than 8.5% ABV 412 £288.10 per
   hectolitre
--
   imported (in strengths measured by reference to the following
   percentages of alcohol at a temperature of 20°C).
   Class or description Tax type code Rate of excise duty
   Sparkling exceeding 5.5% ABV but less than 8.5% ABV 422 £288.10 per
   hectolitre
--
3. Beer

   Class or description Tax type code Rate of excise duty
   Made in UK (standard rate, that is, annual production more than 60,000
   hectolitres) 407 £19.08 for each hectolitre per 1% ABV charged to the
--
   (and the respective proportionate charges for parts of hectolitres)
   If total ABdoes not exceed 1.2% 431 Nil
   Made in UK — high strength Beer Duty (applies to beer exceeding 7.5%
   ABV — general Beer Duty is also due on all UK-produced high strength
   beer) 445 £5.69 for each hectolitre per 1% ABV charged to the nearest
   0.1% ABV (and the respective proportionate charges for parts of
   hectolitres)
   Imported beer — high strength Beer Duty (applies to beer exceeding 7.5%
   ABV — general Beer Duty is also due on all imported high strength beer)
   447 £5.69 for each hectolitre per 1% ABV charged to the nearest 0.1%
   ABV (and the respective proportionate charges for parts of hectolitres)
   Made in UK — reduced rate of general Beer Duty (applies to beer
   exceeding 1.2% ABVbut not exceeding 2.8% ABV) 444 £8.42 for each
   hectolitre per 1% ABV c res)
   Imported beer — reduced rate of general Beer Duty (applies to beer
   exceeding 1.2% ABV but not exceeding 2.8% ABV) 446 £8.42 for each
   hectolitre per 1% ABV charged to the nearest 0.1% ABV (and the
   respective proportionate charges for parts of hectolitres)

   Reduced rates of duty were introduced from 1 June 2002 for beer
   produced by independent breweries producing no more than 30,000
   hectolitres. For breweries producing between 5,000 and 30,000
   hectolitres, the following arithmetical formula is used to calculate
   the rate of duty.

   (Annual production — 2,500) ÷ annual production × standard rate of duty
   at the time concerned. This must be rounded up to the nearest penny.

   Reduced rates of duty were also introduced from 1 June 2004 for beer
   produced by independent breweries producing between 30,000 and 60,000
   hectolitres.

   The following arithmetical formula is used to calculate the rate of
   duty for these breweries.

   (Annual production — (2,500 — 8.3% ABV of annual production in excess
   of 30,000 hectolitres)) × standard rate of duty at the time concerned ÷
   annual production.

--
   beer.

   The duty is charged on alcoholic strength to one decimal place, for
   example 4.19% ABV becomes 4.1% ABV (ignore figures after the first
   decimal place).

   Low alcohol beverages made from malt exceeding 0.5% ABV but not
   exceeding 1.2% ABV are not liable to excise duty.

   Examples of beer-based beverages are set out in the section on Low
   alcohol beverages which also shows the rate of excise duty for these
   products up to 5.5% ABV. Beer and spirits mixtures exceeding 1.2% ABV
   are liable to duty at the spirits rate. Beer mixtures containing
   dutiable liquors other than spirits and exceeding 5.5% ABV are liable
   at the appropriate made-wine rate.

   Small brewery beer relief will still be available on the general Beer
   Duty element of beer above 7.5% ABV. However, it will not apply to high
   strength Beer Duty and no further relief will be applied to the reduced
   rate of general Beer Duty for lower strength beers.

4. Cider and perry
--
   Cider (or perry) — manufactured in the UK by a registered maker of
   cider or perry or imported.
   Class or description Tax type code Rate of excise duty
   Sparkling made in the UK or imported exceeding 5.5% ABV but less than
   8.5% ABV 485 £288.10 per hectolitre
--

   Class or description — UK-produced whisky Tax type code Rate of excise
   duty
   Wholly malt 461 £28.74 per litre of alcohol in the spirits at a
   temperature of 20°C
--
   If spirits are imported in bottles which the importer does not wish to
   be opened for test, HMRC will normally be prepared to accept excise
   duty on the basis of a declared strength of 77% ABV volume for
   drinkable spirits. HMRC reserves the right to test any consignment.

--
   does not exceed 5.5% ABV.

   Beer-based beverage duty only applies to beverages of an alcoholic
   strength exceeding 1.2% ABV but not exceeding 5.5% ABV.

   There are 2 different rates of duty for a beer-based beverage:
     * one where the alcohol by volume content exceeds 1.2% ABV but does
       not exceed 2.8% ABV
--
       does not exceed 5.5% ABV

   Class or description Tax type code Rate of excise duty
   Not exceeding 1.2% volume 431 Nil
   Exceeding 1.2% volume but not exceeding 4.0% 433 £91.68 per hectolitre
--
6.1 Definitions and notes

   Beer-based beverage duty only applies to beverages of an alcoholic
   strength exceeding 1.2% ABV but not exceeding 5.5% ABV and cannot be
   dutiable as a ‘made-wine’.
--
          + any alcoholic liquor or other alcoholic substance

   A reduced rate of general Beer Duty should be applied to beer-based
   beverages of an alcoholic strength exceeding 1.2% ABV but not exceeding
   2.8% ABV. The tax type codes 444 or 446 should be used based on the
--
7. Imported composite goods containing alcohol

   Goods containing ingredients liable to excise duty are chargeable with:
     * Customs Duty where appropriate on the goods as a whole
     * excise duty on the ingredient

   The tax type codes and excise duty rates are the same as for the type
   of alcohol used as the ingredient, for example, spirits (451) £28.74
   per litre of alcohol.
--
7.1 Exceptions

   Class or description Excise duty
   Medical preparations — spirits in mixture, compounds or other
   preparations which are recognised by the Commissioners as being used
--
8. Tobacco products

   Class or description Tax type code Rate of excise duty from 6pm 15
   March 2023 Minimum excise tax
   Cigarettes 611 An amount equal to the higher of the following
   alternatives either £294.72 per 1,000 cigarettes plus 16.5% of retail
   price or £393.45 per 1,000 cigarettes. £393.45 per 1,000 cigarettes
   Cigars 615 £367.61 per kg — the weight for duty is the total weight of
   the cigar, which may exclude any detachable filter or mouthpiece Not
   applicable
--
8.1 Definitions and notes

   For the purposes of Tobacco Products Duty, tobacco products are defined
   in the Tobacco Products (Descriptions of Products) Order 2003 SI
   2003/1471. The following is a summary of those definitions.
--
9. Hydrocarbon oil

   The Hydrocarbon Oil Duties Act 1979 (HODA) specifies full rates of
   excise duty on mineral oils and rebates of duty. The effect of applying
   a rebate of duty to a full rate is to create a lower rate of duty.
   These lower rates are known as rebated rates. This mechanism increases
   the number of effective rates of mineral oils excise duty.

9.1 Light oil

   Description of goods Full or unrebated rate of excise duty — £ per
   litre Rebate — £ per litre Type of tax code Effective rate of excise
   Unrebated (unmarked) — aviation gasoline (including light oil aviation
--
9.2 Heavy oil

   Description of goods Full or unrebated rate of excise duty — £ per
   litre Rebate — £ per litre Type of tax code Effective rate of excise
   Unrebated (unmarked, including Diesel Engine Road Vehicle (DERV) or
--
   Other (unmarked) 0.5295 0.5295 570 Nil

9.3 For the purpose of these duties

   ‘Hydrocarbon oil’ means petroleum oils, coal tar, and oils produced
--

   ‘Rebated oil’ means oil which has been delivered for home use on
   allowance of a rebate of excise duty under the Hydrocarbon Oil Duties
   Act 1979, sections 11 and 14.

   Supplementary information about the duty on hydrocarbon oil.

   Eligibility for rebate, as set out, is restricted as follows.
--
   be observed are set out in Excise Notice 179.

   The excise duty on hydrocarbon oil removed to a refinery, instead of
   being charged at the time of importation, is charged on the delivery of
   any goods from the refinery for home use, and is the same as that which
   would be payable on the importation of like goods. It is therefore
   allowed the same rebate as would be allowed on importation. Any customs
   duty chargeable is payable when the oil is taken into use at the
   refinery, whether as feedstock or otherwise.

   From 15 October 1993 the unit for calculation of duty on hydrocarbon
   oils is the standard litre, that is, litres at 15°C. If not already
   expressed in those terms quantities will need to be converted. Further
--

   It’s illegal for any person to mix any oil on which no rebate of excise
   duty has been allowed with:
     * fuel oil, gas oil, kerosene or light oil (including unleaded
       petrol) on which rebate of excise duty has been allowed
     * oil delivered without payment of excise duty

   except under and in accordance with either an approval granted by the
--
   Commissioners.

   For excisedDuty purposes the methods of test whether any material is
   solid or semi-solid at a temperature of 15°C, and for the distillation
   characteristics of oil, are those laid down by the Institute of
--

   Goods containing mineral oils as a part or ingredient of them are not
   liable to excise duty unless they are intended for use as substitutes
   for road fuels or as additives to road fuels or road fuel substitutes.
   Any articles imported for these purposes are chargeable with UK excise
   duty on 100% of their volume (not only on the percentage of mineral
   oil, if any, contained within them). The tax type codes and excise duty
   rates to be applied are the same as for the type of mineral oil which
   the product is intended to substitute for or is to be added to.

   Lubricating oils will not be charged with UK excise duty unless they
   are to be added to an additives package, in which case excise duty will
   be charged on the whole package.

10.1 Miscellaneous road fuels — road fuel gases

   Class or description of goods Type of tax code Rate of excise duty
   Natural gas (methane content > 80%) 591 £0.2257 per kg
   Road fuel gas (other than natural gas which is gaseous at 15°C and
--
       liable to the levy
     * LPG when used for heating purposes is not subject to mineral oils
       excise duty so is liable to levy
     * the conversion rate of 2,000 litres per tonne is to be used when
       covering litres of liquid propane and butane to kg
--
12. Biofuels

   Description of goods Full or unrebated rate of excise duty — £ per
   litre Rebate — £ per litre Type of tax code Effective rate of excise —
   £ per litre
--
   ratios of each.

   For the purpose of these duties:

   ‘Biodiesel’ is a diesel quality liquid fuel produced from biomass or
--
   biomass and is capable of being used for the same purpose as light oil.

13. Reliefs from excise duty

13.1 General

   The following reliefs relate only to excise duties and do not extend to
   any customs duties to which imported goods may be liable. For a list of
   the reliefs from customs duties allowable in respect of imported goods
   (which in some circumstances may extend to excise as well as import
   duty).

13.2 Alcoholic liquors
--
Nature and conditions of relief

   Duty paid on alcohol which has been used for these purposes can be
   claimed back (see Excise Notice 41), section 4.

--
   Having been removed from the registered premises of a brewer and
   returned to the brewer as spoilt or otherwise unfit for use (Alcoholic
   Liquor Duties Act 1979, section 46(1).

Nature and conditions of relief

   Remission or repayment of duty (see the Beer Regulations 1993).
   Statutory Instrument 1993/1228/ — Part IX covers spoilt beer (see
   Excise Notice 226).
--
   Scope of relief and statutory provision Nature and conditions of relief
   Contained in an article, imported or delivered from warehouse,
   recognised as being used for medical purposes (Alcoholic Liquor Duties
   Act 1979, section 7). Free of duty (see Excise Notice 47).
   Proved to the satisfaction of the Commissioners of Revenue and Customs
   to have been used for scientific purposes or used solely in the
   manufacture or preparation of articles recognized by them as being used
   for medical purposes. (Alcoholic Liquor Duties Act 1979, section 8).
   Spirits for these purposes can be used for received duty free, from an
   excise warehouse by trades as properly authorized (see Excise Notice
   47).
   Delivered from excise warehouse for use in the conditions manufacture
   of denatured alcohol. (Alcoholic Liquor Duties Act 1979, section 75).
   Free of spirits duty subject to such as the Commissioners see fit to
   impose (see Excise Notice 473).
   Delivered from excise warehouse to authorised persons for use in any
   art or manufacture where the Commissioners of Revenue and Customs are
   satisfied that the use of denatured alcohol is unsuitable or
   detrimental (Alcoholic Liquor Duties Act 1979, section 10). Free of
   duty subject to such conditions as the Commissioners see fit to impose
   (see Excise Notice 47).
   Contained in goods not for human consumption (Alcoholic Liquor Duties
   Act 1979, section 11). Free of duty, subject to certain conditions (see
   Excise Notice 64).
   Used in warehouse in specified proportions to fortify made-wine or wine
   (Alcoholic Liquor Duties Act 1979, sections 57 and 68). Free of spirits
   duty subject to such conditions as the Commissioners see fit to impose.

13.5 Tobacco products
--

   Used solely for the purposes of research or experiment (Tobacco
   Products Duty Act 1979, section 2(2)).

Nature and conditions of relief

   Free of duty subject to such conditions as the Commissioners see fit to
   impose (see Excise Notice 476).

--
   Scope of relief and statutory provision Nature and conditions of relief
   Used on board vessels including hovercraft but not pleasure craft
   engaged on marine voyages (Hydrocarbon Oil Duties Act (Marine Voyager
   Reliefs) Regulations 1996). Light oil — repayment of duty paid.
   Heavy oil — shipment duty-free or repayment of duty paid (see Excise
   Notice 263).
   Consumed in premises approved by the Commissioners of Revenue and
   Customs as a refinery in a process of chemical conversion into
   substances other than hydrocarbon oil. (Hydrocarbon Oil Duties Act
   1979, section 6). Free of duty (see Excise Notice 179).
   Heavy oil used in horticulture. (Hydrocarbon Oil Duties Act 1979,
   section 17). Repayment of duty (see Excise Notice 183).
   Delivered to a person approved by the Commissioners for use other than
   as motor fuel (including as extender or additive to motor fuel) or as
   heating fuel. (Hydrocarbon Oil Duties Act 1979, section 9). Delivery or
   importation free of duty or repayment of any excise duty paid (see
   Excise Notice 184A).
   Rebated oil used as fuel in power plants producing energy for the
   treatment or production of oil at refineries or producers’ premises.
   (Hydrocarbon Oil Duties Act 1979, sections 19A and 27(1)). Free of
   excise duty if eligible for full relief, repayment of excise duty if
   eligible for partial relief (see Excise Notice 179, Appendix K).

--

   Under the Excise Goods (Drawback) Regulations 1995, regulation 7(6),
   duty on the goods must have been paid not more than 3 years before the
   event (such as, exportation) giving rise to the claim for drawback.

--
Beer

   Drawback equal to the excise duty shown to the satisfaction of the
   Commissioners of Revenue and Customs to have been paid (see paragraph
   on Beer) may be claimed on beer imported or removed from the Isle of
   Man or produced in the UK on which it is shown that excise duty has
   been paid upon being exported, or shipped as stores.

Conditions and rates — hydrocarbon oil

   Drawback equal to the excise duty shown to the satisfaction of the
   Commissioners to have been paid (see paragraph on Hydrocardon Oil) may
   be claimed on hydrocarbon oil or any article containing hydrocarbon oil
