   Guidance

Complying with the biodiversity duty

   As a public authority, understand what the biodiversity duty is and how
   to comply with it.

--
Contents

    1. Who must comply with the biodiversity duty
    2. When to meet your biodiversity duty
    3. Consider relevant strategies
    4. How your biodiversity duty helps achieve biodiversity goals and
       targets
    5. Actions you could take
--
   Public authorities who operate in England must consider what they can
   do to conserve and enhance biodiversity in England. This is the
   strengthened ‘biodiversity duty’ that the Environment Act 2021
   introduces.

--
    3. Act to deliver your policies and achieve your objectives.

Who must comply with the biodiversity duty

   You must meet the biodiversity duty if you are a public authority, such
   as a:
     * government department or public body
     * local authority or local planning authority
     * statutory undertaker – a business that has public authority duties
       for their land and delivers something of public importance

When to meet your biodiversity duty

   You must complete your first consideration of what action to take for
--

   You must check if these strategies will affect how your organisation
   complies with the biodiversity duty:
     * local nature recovery strategies
     * species conservation strategies
--
   positive actions you plan to take in the strategy, you can help improve
   their quality. It will also make it easier for you to show how you have
   fulfilled your duty.

   Guidance on how local planning authorities should consider local nature
--
   catchment.

How your biodiversity duty helps achieve biodiversity goals and targets

   The action you take for biodiversity will contribute to the achievement
--
   As a core component of natural capital, biodiversity supports ecosystem
   services that benefit people and the economy. When thinking about what
   actions you could take as part of your duty, you could consider the
   value of taking a Natural Capital approach.

   If your public authority is involved with development plans and
   decisions, consider your biodiversity duty when you’re complying with
   requirements under:
     * strategic environmental assessment
--

   You should already be helping to conserve and enhance biodiversity on
   this land. For example, public bodies already have a duty to take all
   reasonable steps to conserve and enhance sites of special scientific
   interest.
--

   Consider designated areas such as national parks or areas of
   outstanding natural beauty (AONB) as part of your biodiversity duty.
   This is important if you have functions in or close to a site
   designated as a national park or AONB. Improving nature in national
   parks or AONBs is an action that can enhance and conserve biodiversity.
   If appropriate to your public body, you could comply with your
   biodiversity duty by:
     * helping to develop and implement management plans for national
       parks or AONBs
--

   Changes to internal policies and processes that can affect biodiversity
   are another way you can meet your duty. Policies you could review
   include:
     * transport – support sustainable travel to reduce carbon emissions
--
   Local authorities (excluding parish councils) and local planning
   authorities must write and publish a biodiversity report. Other public
   authorities must fulfil their duty, but do not need to publish a
   report.

--
   5-yearly reviews of the Environmental Improvement Plan.

   Defra’s reporting your biodiversity duty actions guidance gives
   information about when you must publish your report and what you need
   to include.
