
Focus areas
          + Consumer Duty
          + Cost of living: firm information
          + Helping people access cash
          + Regulatory framework reforms
          + Senior Managers and Certification Regime
       Consumer Duty
       We're hosting events to help firms prepare for the new rules. Sign
       up to hear about these and related communications.
--
    1. Home
    2. Publications
    3. Consumer Duty implementation plans

Consumer Duty implementation plans

   Multi-firm reviews Published: 25/01/2023 Last updated: 25/01/2023
   Print this publication

   The Consumer Duty will set higher and clearer standards of consumer
   protection across financial services and require firms to act to
   deliver good outcomes for customers. We set out here the findings from
   our review of firms’ plans to embed the Duty within their businesses.

Share
--
          + 6.6. Data strategies

   The Consumer Duty will set higher and clearer standards of consumer
   protection across financial services and require firms to act to
   deliver good outcomes for customers. We set out here the findings from
   our review of firms’ plans to embed the Duty within their businesses.

1. Why we conducted this review

   In July 2022, we set out the final rules and guidance for a new
   Consumer Duty. The Consumer Duty is a cornerstone of our three-year
   strategy and a key element of our work to set and test higher
   standards.
--

   In our Policy Statement, we said we want firms to make full use of the
   implementation period to embed the Duty effectively. We also said we
   would support firms’ work by feeding back useful insights on what we
   see in the market. We set out our expectation that by the end of
   October 2022, firms’ boards (or equivalent management body) should have
   agreed their plans for implementing the Duty and be able to evidence
   they have scrutinised and challenged their plans to ensure they are
   deliverable and robust enough to meet the new standards.
--
   We have reviewed the implementation plans of larger ‘fixed’ firms,
   which have a dedicated supervision team at the FCA, where we believe
   they are substantially in scope of the Duty. We did this to better
   understand firms’ approach to embedding the Duty within their
   businesses. As well as engaging with individual firms directly, we are
   publishing findings from this review to help all firms understand our
   expectations and implement the Duty more effectively.

2. Who this applies to

   The findings from this review are likely to interest:
     * regulated firms preparing for the Consumer Duty to come into force

     * industry groups/trade bodies
--
3.1. The firms in our review

   After the end of October 2022 milestone, we requested the Consumer Duty
   implementation plans from larger fixed firms with a dedicated FCA
   supervision team, who primarily operate in retail financial services
--

   We reviewed these implementation plans to better understand firms’
   approach to embedding the Duty within their businesses. We considered a
   range of different factors, including:
     * Firms’ approach to governance and arrangements for ongoing
--
       providers where firms are dependent on third parties to implement
       their plans.
     * How far plans address the substantive requirements of the Duty as
       set out in our final rules and guidance. This includes the four
       outcome areas involving products and services, price and value,
--
     * Firms’ culture and people strategies to ensure their business will
       be focused on delivering good outcomes for consumers and that all
       staff understand their responsibilities under the Duty.

4. What we found
--
4.1. Summary of findings and implications for firms

   We welcome all firms’ efforts to respond to the Consumer Duty and make
   the changes needed to meet the new standards within the implementation
   period. This review adds to our understanding of the progress that the
--
   Many of the plans we reviewed showed that firms have understood and
   embraced the shift to focus on consumer outcomes, established extensive
   programmes of work to embed the Duty, and are engaging with the
   substantive requirements, including the four outcome areas. We are
   convinced this will bring benefits for both consumers and firms.

   However, we did also identify plans that suggested some firms may be
   further behind in their thinking and planning for the Duty. This brings
   a risk that they may not be ready in time, or they may struggle to
   embed the Duty effectively throughout their business.

   We know that the plans we reviewed can only give us a snapshot of
--
   an important overview of progress in large firms, and a benchmark for
   our ongoing engagement with those firms as we work to ensure they embed
   the Duty effectively.

   Through our review we have identified many examples of good practice,
--
       appropriately, focusing on reducing the risk of poor consumer
       outcomes and assessing where they are likely to be furthest away
       from the requirements of the Duty.
     * Embedding the substantive requirements: We recognise plans were
       likely to be high level given the early stage at which we reviewed
--
       that their existing policies and processes will be adequate. We
       urge firms to carefully consider the substantive requirements of
       the Duty, as set out in our final rules and guidance. Firms should
       ensure that, when they are reviewing their products and services,
       communications and customer journeys, they identify and make the
       changes needed to meet the new standards.
     * Working with other firms: To implement the Duty on time, many firms
       need to work and share information with other firms in the
       distribution chain. However, we found some plans which gave little
--
       their work on this important aspect of implementation.

   As they oversee the implementation of the Duty, firms’ boards and
   management bodies will want to particularly focus and provide challenge
   in the three areas above, as well as the wider points in the ‘key
--
     * We will continue to engage with fixed firms where we have questions
       about their plans or approach, and to monitor the progress they are
       making in embedding the Duty. We will also be working with and
       supporting board champions at some larger firms.
     * We will soon be sending a survey to a sample of firms to help us
       understand the progress they are making in implementing the Duty
       and will carry out targeted engagement with smaller firms.
     * We will shortly be issuing letters to firms, highlighting our key
       expectations on implementing the Duty and some of the key risks and
       consumer harms we are concerned about in their sectors.
     * Our programme of communications on the Duty will continue, for
       example, with further updates to our dedicated webpages and a
       series of regional in-person events for specific groups of small
--
   cite practices and examples we identified in our review where firms may
   need to develop their approach further to ensure they meet expectations
   under the Duty when it comes into force. Our supervisors are also
   providing feedback to individual firms, where appropriate.

6.1. Governance and oversight

   Under the Duty, we will be holding firms – including their senior
   managers and boards – accountable for delivering good outcomes for
   consumers. We want to see senior leaders in firms driving the changes
   needed to meet the Duty standard.

   We have set an expectation that firms appoint a Consumer Duty champion
   at board or equivalent level. This is not a ‘prescribed responsibility’
   under the Senior Managers & Certification Regime (SM&CR). Instead, this
   champion role is to support the Chair and CEO in raising the Duty in
   all relevant discussions and to challenge the firm’s management on how
   it is embedding the Duty and focusing on consumer outcomes. Our rules
   also make clear that we expect customer outcomes to be a key focus for
   important areas, such as risk and internal audit functions.
--
       firm is delivering one-to-one deep dive sessions with board members
       on plan deliverables.
     * Most firms have appointed a Consumer Duty board champion at an
       appropriate level to ensure that the Duty is discussed in a
       meaningful way. We identified an example where a firm with a large
       group structure has appointed two champions to reflect the
--
     * Many plans detailed clear arrangements for ongoing scrutiny of
       their firm’s implementation work by the board, executive and their
       audit and risk functions. For example, by making the Duty a
       standing agenda item at key governance forums and through plans for
       independent reviews of implementation work by risk and compliance
--
          + frank assessments by these teams of current risks to
            successful and timely delivery
          + assurance of the effectiveness of controls in place over Duty
            implementation
          + planned assurance work before the deadline on implementation,
--
            deadline
     * Some firms have established central coordinating forums to drive
       consistency in interpreting the Duty across different business
       functions, or for coordinating required changes to systems and
       technology across workstreams.
--
       updates on the implementation programme would be provided to key
       governance bodies, including the board.
     * Some firms have been slow to appoint a Consumer Duty board
       champion. In one example, a champion was proposed who did not
       appear sufficiently senior to provide confidence they would be able
       to effectively challenge the firm’s approach to implementing the
       Duty.
     * A small number of firms did not propose an individual champion or
       champions but suggested that the role be shared across the entire
--
       on how they will engage with the board and executive
       post-implementation to provide ongoing assurance that they are
       meeting expectations under the Duty.

6.2. Culture and people

   The higher standards of the Duty and the shift to focusing on consumer
   outcomes will require a significant change in many firms’ culture.

--
   customers. Individual accountability and high standards of personal
   conduct in firms will ensure that firms are meeting their obligations
   under the Duty.

   Chapter 10 of our Finalised Guidance gives more information on our
--

     * Some plans set out a clear people and training approach to ensure
       all staff understand their responsibilities under the Duty.
       Different approaches were proposed to engage staff, including
       all-staff and role-tailored training, internal communications
       campaigns and awareness-raising through company town hall meetings.
       One firm noted that it had delivered interactive training on the
       Duty to its board.
     * One firm set out plans to explain its purpose and values in a way
       aligned with delivering good consumer outcomes, updating internal
       cultural and training materials to reflect this as appropriate.
       Another firm detailed how it will embed the Duty in its strategy,
       governance structure and decision making.
     * Some plans confirmed firms will review reward and incentive
       structures and performance management frameworks at all levels to
       ensure they reflect the Duty. One firm noted it plans to
       incorporate the Duty within the design of its staff performance
       scorecard. Others explained that their SMCR regime will be updated
       to include the Duty, with senior leaders expected to lead the
       cultural change needed.

--

     * Other plans were lacking in detail in this area, with limited
       information about how the Duty will be embedded in firms’ culture
       and people approach.
     * In some cases, plans recognised the importance of a culture focused
--
       this is the case. These plans gave no evidence of any consideration
       of how far their firm’s current purpose, culture and values do, or
       do not, align with the Duty, or how improvements in those would be
       made.

6.3. Deliverability

   Embedding the Duty is a complex task. We recognised this in extending
   and phasing the implementation period. So, it is essential that firms
   continue to develop and monitor robust implementation plans to make the
   changes needed to meet our expectations when the Duty comes into
   force.

--
       realistic prospect of meeting the implementation deadline. In one
       example, a firm had allocated specific workstreams based on the
       structure of the Duty and its requirements as set out in our final
       rules and guidance. Each workstream included a clear breakdown of
       deliverables, milestones, and target completion dates with a
       framework for tracking progress.
     * It was typical to see firms break down their implementation
       programmes into workstreams aimed directly at the Duty’s four
       outcomes and closely related considerations like vulnerability.
       Other workstreams were aimed at key ‘enablers’ such as policies and
--
       group structure.
     * Some firms have clearly committed resource that matches the scale
       of uplift and challenges presented by implementing the Duty. We
       noted examples where firms have identified early, and in detail,
       any resource shortfalls for timely implementation – especially in
--
       this. Some firms are investing sensibly in support and advice from
       external experts where this assists and adds value.
     * Some firms had considered how their Consumer Duty implementation
       work aligns with other ongoing change initiatives or strategic
       programmes. They considered alignment and differences, as well as
--
       implementation work. This approach was based on an initial
       assessment of where they believe they have most work to do to meet
       the Duty standard and there is greatest potential for poor consumer
       outcomes. For example, we saw plans that recognised where certain
       parts of the business may be starting from further back in their
       journey towards implementing the Duty. Others identified and ranked
       in a reasoned and consistent way the products or services, customer
       journeys and communications which present higher risk of harm under
       the Duty. They then prioritised these for detailed review or gap
       analysis against the Duty outcomes.
     * We found evidence of firms seeking to pragmatically meet the
       challenge of timely implementation by taking more agile or flexible
--
6.4. Third parties

   The Duty applies to all firms with a key role in delivering retail
   customer outcomes, including those with no direct customer
   relationship. It will be essential for firms to work together across
--
   Firms should therefore be considering where and how they work with
   third parties to deliver products and services to customers, and make
   sure these arrangements will meet expectations under the Duty. This
   includes other firms in the distribution chain and where firms
   outsource the delivery of services to other parties. In particular,
--
   distributors to allow them to meet their obligations.

   Chapter 2 of our Finalised Guidance explains how the Duty applies
   across the distribution chain. Chapter 6 gives examples of the type of
   information we would expect to be shared between firms, where
--
       their plan for this work. We identified one example where a firm
       had set a cross-outcome objective to work with partners in a
       transparent way to ensure cooperation and that Duty requirements
       are met. Other examples included:
          + a firm working with a key supplier on a framework for
            engagement on the Duty
          + detail of a firm’s extensive engagement with a critical
            supplier to shape its plan
--
6.5. The four outcomes

   We expect the Consumer Duty to improve outcomes for consumers in all
   areas of business between firms and customers. The Duty’s four outcomes
   cover the key elements of the firm-consumer relationship.

   The Duty means consumers should get communications they can understand,
   products and services that meet their needs and offer fair value, and
   they get the customer support they need, when they need it.
--
   Finalised Guidance), identify where they fall short, and make the
   changes necessary to their products, communications, systems and
   processes to meet the Duty standard.

Good practice

   Some plans were clearer than others that firms had engaged with the
   substantive requirements of the Duty and considered what these mean for
   their businesses and the changes they will likely need to make. The
   most effective plans in this area attempted to define good customer
--
     * Some firms had identified where they will need to build on existing
       product governance and assessment frameworks to meet the new
       requirements under the Duty. For example, one firm acknowledged
       that it needs to collect greater granularity of information to
       ensure the design and management of its products and services is
--
       needs to evolve to better consider non-price factors and ensure
       there is a reasonable relationship between costs and benefits to
       meet Duty requirements. Another firm noted that it has new pricing
       models under development. Similarly, one firm recognised that its
       product pricing structure may need to change to address an issue it
--
     * Given the high-level nature of many plans at time of review, there
       was more limited evidence in some plans of how firms have engaged
       with the substantive requirements of the Duty. For example, plans
       included high-level actions such as ‘review customer-focused
       policies and procedures to ensure they capture and reference the
       requirements of the Duty’ and ‘assess whether existing products
       deliver fair value’. This type of task-based description gave no
       indication of how firms have interpreted the Duty’s requirements
       and considered the challenges of how they will apply them to their
       businesses, or the consumer outcomes they are aiming to deliver.
     * Other plans seemed rather complacent about past improvements,
       initiatives or current frameworks, and their adequacy for meeting
       the Duty or for putting the firm in a good position to do so.
     * In several cases, it was unclear exactly what methodology or
       approach the firm will use in its reviews or gap analyses of
       products, services, communications and customer journeys against
       the Duty outcomes. Similarly, it was unclear how some firms will
       amend and uplift existing assessment frameworks to meet the Duty
       standard. If firms are behind in their thinking about how exactly
       to conduct these reviews and gap exercises effectively, they risk
--
6.6. Data strategies

   A key part of the Duty is that firms assess, test, understand and
   evidence the outcomes their customers are receiving. Without this, it
   will be impossible for firms to know that they are meeting the
   requirements set out in the Consumer Duty.

   The type of information firms will use will vary depending on factors
--

    Firms will need to use their judgement to identify data sources as
   evidence against the outcomes of the Duty. Chapter 11 of our Finalised
   Guidance gives examples of the types of data firms could collect.

--
       the data and metrics available across their businesses and set out
       plans to bring these together, as well as any remaining gaps in
       their Consumer Duty data requirements.
     * Some firms set out longer-term strategic aims to advance the
       functionality of their systems and data collection, but also
       shorter-term solutions to evidence and monitor that Duty
       requirements are being met and customers are receiving good
       outcomes.
--

     * Not all plans clearly explained the data required to monitor
       compliance with the Duty. Some plans offered more limited detail of
       firms’ in-depth consideration of their data requirements under the
       Duty and how they will source, package, monitor, govern, and act
       upon these.
     * In some cases, firms’ data strategies seemed to be largely based on
--
       then they risk not thinking deeply or afresh about the types and
       granularity of data that they will actually need to monitor and
       evidence outcomes under the Duty effectively.
     * In some plans there appeared to be more limited consideration of
       how firms will monitor outcomes for different groups of customers,
