   Blog

What is Duty of Care?

   By definition, Duty of Care is a legal obligation imposed on an
   organisation, requiring adherence to a standard of reasonable care
   while preventing any acts that could foreseeably harm others. This
   article explains the role of an employer in fulfilling their Duty of
   Care obligations, the future of Duty of Care and the best practices and
   recommendations for your organisation.

--
   Topic

   Duty of Care

   Health
--
   Wellbeing

Duty of Care by Definition

   First referenced in the landmark case of Donoghue v Stevenson in 1932,
   Duty of Care has historically been connected to legal negligence. Over
   the past century however, the context of the term has drastically
   broadened, impacting organisations of all sizes.

   By definition, Duty of Care is a legal obligation imposed on an
   organisation, requiring adherence to a standard of reasonable care
   while preventing any acts that could foreseeably harm others.

   Much more than providing necessary employee benefits and insurance,
   Duty of Care in the context of the modern workplace encompasses the
   protection of an employee’s health, safety, security and wellbeing.
   Whether on a remote site, at the office, on business travel, on an
   international assignment or working from home, the Duty of Care
   obligations remain and the absence of reasonable measures to prevent
   incidents may undermine an employee’s health and security and
   compromise the organisation’s performance.

The Impact of Overlooking your Duty of Care Responsibilities

   Legal ramifications have historically motivated the concern of
   overlooking Duty of Care responsibilities. The lack of action to
   protect employees has can result in reputational damage, loss of
   productivity, increased employee turnover as well as overall cost.

   As negligent cases emerge in headlines of global news networks, the
   awareness of Duty of Care has increased on a global scale. The pandemic
   played an important part in this heightened awareness, especially from
   the viewpoint of employees. Growing concerns and expectations from
--

   As an organisation that employs a workforce operating in varying
   environments, demonstrating your Duty of Care responsibilities should
   be at the core of your corporate policies.
   Although the legal specifications may vary based on location, size and
   industry, our experts have outlined the critical responsibilities
   employers need to consider:
     * Taking ownership of the concept of Duty of Care: A solid
       understanding of the theory around Duty of Care is essential.
       Nevertheless, for an effective and viable implementation within
       one’s organisation, the latter must take ownership of the concept
       of Duty of Care. To do so, they must consider their organisation’s
       specificities for a bespoke application. These will help determine
       the scope of Duty of Care.
     * Know the typology of your organisation (SME, MNC, NGO, etc.) - Know
       your human, tangible, and intangible assets, your footprint around
--
       digital nomads are fully covered and integrated in your policies.
     * Map and navigate the various internal stakeholders: That will
       inevitably engage with Duty of Care considerations (employees,
       direct managers, security managers, HR, international mobility,
       legal, purchasing, risk manager, insurance, etc.).
     * Have the support of your top management: Top management must be
       convinced by the importance and the benefits of having a robust
       Duty of Care policy in place. To gain their support, they must
       understand what the risks are of not having a policy in place, what
       other organisations in the same industry are doing and how success
--
       find the necessary information. They should also be aware of the
       organisation’s policies and how to raise questions and concerns.
     * Duty of Care in crisis: Although Duty of Care responsibilities
       should exist on a day-to-day basis, they become all the more
       critical in times of crisis. When time is of the essence, the
--
       communicating with your employees plays a key role in a crisis
       management response.
     * Review, revise and re-assess: As Duty of Care obligations are
       spread across departments, the revision of corporate policies and
       procedures should take place on a predefined and regular basis and
       in collaboration with internal and, where relevant, external
       stakeholders. There should be fluidity in your Duty of Care
       framework as your workforce, operations and global environment of
       operations change.

The Future of Duty of Care

   As the risks to employees evolve, so too will the Duty of Care
   responsibilities of employers. As pandemics, global security incidents
   and economic pressures rise, risk prevention measures need to remain
   coherent.
   Although the frequency and volatility of these incidents may continue
   to rise, the foundational Duty of Care responsibilities still apply.
   The demonstration by an organisation to protect their people from harm,
   both physical and psychological, will maintain precedence.
--
       vulnerable employees in times of crisis.

Talk to our Experts About Duty of Care

   For almost four decades, our security, health, logistics and digital
   experts have been supporting over 11,000 global organisations uphold
   their Duty of Care responsibilities.

   Regardless of your industry, size or location, we understand the risks
   of your people and how to empower workforce resilience.

   Get in touch to speak to us about your Duty of Care journey.
   (BUTTON) Back to top
     * How we can support
