   [redbulle.gif] actions taken against dumping (selling at an unfairly
   low price)
   [redbulle.gif] subsidies and special countervailing duties to offset
   the subsidies
   [redbulle.gif] emergency measures to limit imports temporarily,
--
   normally break the GATT principles of [21]binding a tariff and [22]not
   discriminating between trading partners typically anti-dumping action
   means charging extra import duty on the particular product from the
   particular exporting country in order to bring its price closer to the
   normal value or to remove the injury to domestic industry in the
--
   shows dumping is taking place and domestic industry is being hurt, the
   exporting company can undertake to raise its price to an agreed level
   in order to avoid anti-dumping import duty.

   Detailed procedures are set out on how anti-dumping cases are to be
--
   procedure to seek the withdrawal of the subsidy or the removal of its
   adverse effects. Or the country can launch its own investigation and
   ultimately charge extra duty (known as countervailing duty) on
   subsidized imports that are found to be hurting domestic producers.

--
   subsidy is prohibited, it must be withdrawn immediately. Otherwise, the
   complaining country can take counter measures. If domestic producers
   are hurt by imports of subsidized products, countervailing duty can be
   imposed.

--
   subsidy must be withdrawn or its adverse effect must be removed. Again,
   if domestic producers are hurt by imports of subsidized products,
   countervailing duty can be imposed.

   Some of the disciplines are similar to those of the Anti-Dumping
   Agreement. Countervailing duty (the parallel of anti-dumping duty) can
   only be charged after the importing country has conducted a detailed
   investigation similar to that required for anti-dumping action. There
--
   countervailing measures. The subsidized exporter can also agree to
   raise its export prices as an alternative to its exports being charged
   countervailing duty.

   Subsidies may play an important role in developing countries and in the
--
   developing countries the deadline was 2000. Developing countries also
   receive preferential treatment if their exports are subject to
   countervailing duty investigations. For transition economies,
   prohibited subsidies had to be phased out by 2002.

--

   Dumping and subsidies together with anti-dumping (AD) measures and
   countervailing duties (CVD) share a number of similarities. Many
   countries handle the two under a single law, apply a similar process to
   deal with them and give a single authority responsibility for
--

   The reaction to dumping and subsidies is often a special offsetting
   import tax (countervailing duty in the case of a subsidy). This is
   charged on products from specific countries and therefore it breaks the
   GATT principles of [35]binding a tariff and treating trading partners
   equally ([36]MFN). The agreements provide an escape clause, but they
   both also say that before imposing a duty, the importing country must
   conduct a detailed investigation that shows properly that domestic
   industry is hurt.
