     * Tax Laws

Duty Tax on Imports and Exports: Meaning and Examples

   By
--
   Trending Videos

What Is a Duty?

   The term "duty" refers to a form of taxation levied on certain goods,
   services, or other transactions. People and corporations may be
   required to pay levies on imports and exports by governments in the
   form of customs duties and other taxes. This is done in order to
   collect revenue and to satisfy other economic reasons. Duties are
   enforceable by law and may be imposed on commodities or financial
   transactions instead of individuals.
--
Key Takeaways

     * A duty is a form of taxation levied on certain goods, services, or
       other transactions that are imported and exported.
     * Duty rates are a percentage determined by the total value of the
       goods paid for in another country.
     * Duties provide a form of commerce protection for jobs, the economy,
       the environment, and other interests by controlling the influx and
       outflow of merchandise.
     * A duty may also be someone's moral or fiduciary responsibility.

Understanding a Duty

   Governments impose taxes on individuals and companies that make or
   receive shipments internationally. These levies must be paid before
   delivery can be made. These levies are called customs or import duties.
   These are tariffs or taxes imposed on goods transported across
   international borders.

   Customs duty rates are a percentage determined by the total value of
   the goods paid for in another country. The quality, size, or weight of
   the product are not determining factors. The Harmonized Tariff System
--
   tariffs on merchandise imported to the country.

   The intent of this form of duty is to provide a form of commerce
   protection for each country's jobs, economy, environment, and other
   interests by controlling the influx and outflow of merchandise. Duties
   may be imposed on restrictive and prohibited goods that are shipped in
   and out of a country. The imposition and collection of duties also help
   contribute to a nation's revenue pool.

Duties When Traveling

   This form of duty can be revoked in certain situations such as an
   airport's duty-free shop. When customers patronize a duty-free shop,
   commodities that are usually taxed such as cigarettes and alcohol will
   not have a duty levied on them. Foreign visitors will then be able to
   purchase the goods at a lower price compared to domestic citizens.

   There are limits and guidelines for shopping duty-free. The products
   purchased are intended to be taken out of the country where they were
   bought. Shoppers generally have to show their passports when making
   duty-free purchases.

   Travelers who make duty-free purchases may be required to declare to
   customs officials what they bought once they arrive back in their
   respective home countries. They may be required to show receipts for
   the purchases. Monetary limits on the value of duty-free purchases may
   be set. If the value exceeds the threshold, tariffs and local taxes may
   be imposed on the purchases.

   The U.S. Customs and Border Protection will outline the details
   regarding duties on a variety of products. Specific details are
   outlined for tobacco and alcoholic products as well as items being
   brought in from Cuba.﻿﻿
--
Special Considerations

   The term "duty" may also refer to any responsibilities—whether moral or
   otherwise—held by an individual. These are obligations that a
   person—especially someone in a position of authority—has to fulfill the
--
   shareholders. This means that any course of action the CEO takes should
   be in the best interests of the company's shareholders. For example, a
   CEO's duty can include weighing whether or not a merger deal with a
   rival would provide adequate shareholder value.

   This responsibility is also similar to a fiduciary duty. A fiduciary
   duty is when an individual places their trust and reliance on another
   in regards to a monetary situation. For example, a financial adviser
   would have a fiduciary duty to their clients and must act in the best
   interest of their clients. The same would hold true for an executor of
   an estate. The fiduciary has a duty to take responsibility and make
   decisions that will benefit the client above anyone else.

--
   learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate,
   unbiased content in our editorial policy.
    1. U.S. Customs and Border Protection. "Customs Duty Information."
       Accessed Feb. 26, 2021.

