   (BUTTON) Expand
   Table of Contents
     * What Is a Fiduciary Duty?
     * Fiduciary Relationships
     * Types of Duties
     * Breaches in Duty
     * Consequences of a Breach
     * Elements of a Claim
     * Examples of Breach Cases
     * Fiduciary Duty FAQs
     * The Bottom Line

--
     * Laws & Regulations

What Is a Fiduciary Duty? Examples and Types Explained

   By
--
   Learn about our editorial policies

What Is a Fiduciary Duty?

   Fiduciary duty refers to the relationship between a fiduciary and the
   principal or beneficiary on whose behalf the fiduciary acts.

   The fiduciary accepts legal responsibility for duties of care, loyalty,
   good faith, confidentiality, and more when serving the best interests
   of a beneficiary. Strict care must be taken to ensure that no conflict
--
Key Takeaways

     * A fiduciary duty involves actions taken in the best interests of
       another person or entity.
     * Fiduciary duty describes the relationship between an attorney and a
       client or a guardian and a ward.
     * Fiduciary duties include duty of care, loyalty, good faith,
       confidentiality, prudence, and disclosure.
     * It has been successfully argued that an employee may have a
       fiduciary duty of loyalty to an employer.
     * A breach of fiduciary duty occurs when a fiduciary fails to act
       responsibly in the best interests of a client.

--
   In this case, the parent will name a person or an entity, such as a law
   firm or bank, as trustee of the estate. That person or entity has a
   fiduciary duty to the children, who are the beneficiaries of the
   estate.

--

   A common example of an agent/principal relationship that implies
   fiduciary duty is that between the executives of a company and its
   shareholders. The shareholders expect that the executives will make
   well-considered, prudent decisions on their behalf and in their best
--
   on behalf of the client.

   Attorneys can be sued for breaches of their fiduciary duties by
   clients. They are accountable to the court in which a client is
   represented when a breach occurs.
--
Controlling Stockholder/Company

   In certain circumstances, fiduciary duties may be required of a
   stockholder who possesses a majority interest in a corporation or who
   exercises control over its activities. A breach of fiduciary duty may
   result in personal legal liability for the controlling shareholder as
   well as directors and officers.
--
   commits to acting in the best interests of a principal or beneficiary.

Types of Fiduciary Duties

   Fiduciary duties may differ depending on the type of beneficiary that a
   fiduciary serves. However, in general, the legal and ethical
   obligations related to protecting the interests of beneficiaries
   include the following duties.

Duty of Care

   This is the responsibility to inform oneself as completely as possible
--
   available information.

Duty of Loyalty

   This pertains to acting in the best interest of the beneficiary at all
   times, putting their well-being first and foremost. It includes the
   duty of the fiduciary to excuse themself from taking actions when
   there's a conflict of interest with the beneficiary's welfare.

Duty of Good Faith

   This duty pertains to always acting within the law to advance the
   interests of the beneficiary. At no time should the fiduciary take
   actions that are outside of legal constraints.

Duty of Confidentiality

   A fiduciary must maintain the confidentiality of all information
--
   written or spoken, for their personal gain.

Duty of Prudence

   Fiduciaries must administer matters and make decisions concerning the
--
   skill, caution, and critical awareness of risk.

Duty to Disclose

   Fiduciaries must engage in completely forthright behavior, disclosing
   any and all relevant information that could have an impact on their
   ability to carry out their duties as fiduciary and/or on the well-being
   of a beneficiary's interests.

Breaches in Fiduciary Duty

   Fiduciary duties are taken on by individuals and entities for various
   types of beneficiaries. Such relationships include, among others,
   lawyers acting for clients, company executives acting for stockholders,
--
   investors, and trustees acting for estate beneficiaries.

   An employee may even have a fiduciary duty to an employer. That is,
   employers have a right to expect that employees are acting in their
   best interests. For example, they are not sharing trade secrets, or
--
   from a competitor.

   These expectations may not be actual fiduciary duties but they may be
   spelled out in an employee handbook or contract clause.

   Case law indicates that breaches of fiduciary duty most often happen
   when a binding fiduciary relationship is in effect and actions are
   taken which violate or are counterproductive to the interests of a
--
Consequences of a Fiduciary Breach

   A breach of fiduciary duty can lead to a number of consequences. Not
   all of them are legal consequences.
    1. An accusation of a breach of fiduciary duty can hurt the reputation
       of a professional. A client can end a professional relationship
       because they do not trust in a professional’s care of the required
       fiduciary duty.
    2. If a breach of duty case proceeds to the courts, steeper
       consequences can result. A successful breach of fiduciary duty
       lawsuit can result in monetary penalties for direct damages,
       indirect damages, and legal costs.
--
       a license, or removal from service.

   However, proving a breach of fiduciary duty is not always easy.

Elements of a Fiduciary Breach Claim
--
   A number of legal precedents and elements have been established to
   allow claims by those who have been harmed by a breach of fiduciary
   duty. Jurisdictions differ, but in general, the following four elements
   are essential if a plaintiff is to prevail in a breach of fiduciary
   duty claim.

A Duty Existed

   The plaintiff must show that a legal fiduciary duty existed. Many
   professionals are obligated, legally and ethically, to conduct their
   businesses honestly. However, that doesn't mean that they are
   fiduciaries who must act solely in the interest of a particular client.
   A fiduciary duty is accepted as such by a fiduciary, typically in
   writing.

A Breach Occurred

   The plaintiff must show that a fiduciary duty was breached. The type of
   breach varies in every case. For example, if an accountant was sloppy
   in filling out a client's tax returns, and the client was slapped with
   an enormous fine for nonpayment, the accountant may be guilty of a
   breach of fiduciary duty. However, if the client was sloppy and failed
   to provide complete and necessary information, no breach occurred.

--
   The plaintiff must show that the breach of trust caused actual damage.
   Without damage, there is usually no basis for a breach of fiduciary
   duty case. The more specific a principal or beneficiary can be with
   facts of damage, the better.

--
   clearly a conflict of interest. However, a specific accounting relating
   to the loss to the beneficiary is needed to prove a breach of fiduciary
   duty.

Causation Was Proved

   Causation shows that any damages incurred by the plaintiff were
   directly linked with the actions taken in breach of fiduciary duty. In
   the above example of a property sale, the link appears to be clear.
   However, the trustee might argue that a quick sale was in the best
--

   If you suspect your financial adviser is in breach of their fiduciary
   duty, you can file a complaint with FINRA, the SEC, or both. If your
   adviser has a professional certification, you can also notify the
   entity that provided the credential.
--
Examples of Fiduciary Breach Cases

A Duty of Loyalty

   One example of a breach in fiduciary duty case went to the Virginia
   Supreme Court in 2007.

--

   In this case, the question of whether the employees had a fiduciary
   duty to their former employer, and breached it, was fundamental to the
   appeal that brought the case to the state's highest court.

   The court affirmed the lower court's ruling that the employees owed
   Mario a duty of loyalty. In effect, it supported the claim of a breach
   of fiduciary duty, and a penalty of more than $1 million.

A Menswear Store vs. Ex-Employees

   In 2006, a high-end menswear store cited a breach of fiduciary duty
   when it sued two of its former sales professionals for taking a job
   with a competitor, Saks Fifth Avenue. The department store was able to
--
   directly to the actions of its former employees. The suit failed.

Aiding and Abetting a Breach of Duty

   A comptroller for a corporation embezzled $15 million from his employer
--

   The company sued the bank that took the deposits, alleging that it
   aided and abetted a breach of fiduciary duty. The court ruled that
   there was insufficient evidence that the bank was aware of its role in
   the scam.

What Does It Mean to Have a Fiduciary Duty?

   The adjective fiduciary means held or given in trust. In accepting a
   fiduciary duty, an individual or entity accepts a legal commitment to
   act in the best interests of a beneficiary.

What Are the Main Fiduciary Duties?

   There are several types of fiduciary duties. One is the duty of loyalty
   which implies that the fiduciary will always act in the best interests
   of the beneficiary or principal. Duty of care is another. It means that
   a fiduciary will take special care to make sound, sensible decisions
   regarding a beneficiary's well-being. No conflicting interest will be
   permitted to influence the fiduciary's actions on behalf of the client.
   Duty to disclose is a third. It refers to the duty a fiduciary has to
   disclose any conflict of interest they may have when acting on behalf
   of a beneficiary.
--
   acting for a principal.

   However, any individual may, in some cases, have a fiduciary duty to
   another person or entity. For example, an employee may be found to have
   a duty of loyalty to an employer and may be legally liable if they
   cause harm to the employer by misusing information or resources
   entrusted to them.
--
The Bottom Line

   Fiduciary duties refer to the ways that a fiduciary is legally
   committed to act for a principal or beneficiary. They include a duty of
   loyalty, a duty of care, a duty of prudence, a duty of confidentiality,
   and more.

   Fiduciary duties are meant to ensure that the fiduciary acts only in
   the best interests of a principal or beneficiary. What's more, the
   fiduciary must act diligently to protect those interests.
--
   fiduciary, you can protect yourself by understanding the rights that
   this relationship grants you and the responsibilities that are not part
   of a fiduciary's duties.

   Article Sources
--
   Different people pointing fingers at young guy. Different people
   pointing fingers at young guy.
   What Does Duty of Care Mean in Business and Financial Services?
   Colleagues listening to a business presentation Colleagues listening to
   a business presentation
--
   of ethics with examples of each.
   more
   What Does Duty of Care Mean in Business and Financial Services?
   Duty of care is a fiduciary responsibility that requires company
   directors to make decisions in good faith and in a reasonably prudent
   manner.
