
Focus areas
          + Consumer Duty
          + Cost of living: firm information
          + Helping people access cash
          + Regulatory framework reforms
          + Senior Managers and Certification Regime
       Consumer Duty
       We're hosting events to help firms prepare for the new rules. Sign
       up to hear about these and related communications.
--
    1. Home
    2. Firms
    3. Consumer Duty – information for firms

Consumer Duty – information for firms

   First published: 03/10/2022 Last updated: 01/11/2023 See all updates

   To help firms implement the Duty, we explain more on the areas of the
   Duty that we have been receiving firm queries on which are relevant for
   the wider market.

--
   Our approach to supervision and enforcement

   When the Duty comes into force firms need to make sure, and be able to
   show us, that they are acting to deliver good customer outcomes.

--
   Our expectations for outcomes monitoring

   A key part of the Duty is that firms assess, test, understand and
   evidence the outcomes their customers are receiving. Without this, it
   will be impossible for firms to know that they are meeting the
   requirements set out in the Consumer Duty.

   The type of information firms will use will vary depending on factors
--

   Firms will need to use their judgement to identify data sources as
   evidence against the outcomes of the Duty. Chapter 11 of our Finalised
   Guidance gives examples of the types of data firms could collect.

--
   feed back insights to the market.

   Consumer Duty Board champions

   We want firms’ Boards and senior management to make good outcomes for
--
   an Independent Non-Executive Director (NED), where possible. For larger
   organisations with group structures, we expect this champion to be at
   an appropriate Board level so that the Duty is discussed in a
   meaningful way.

   The primary role of the Board champion is to support the Chair and CEO
   in raising the Duty regularly in all relevant discussions, and
   challenging the firm’s governing body/management on how it is embedding
   the Duty and focusing on consumer outcomes.

   This is not a ‘prescribed responsibility’ under the Senior Managers &
--
   Generally, the Board champion should work with the Chair, but this will
   depend on the firm and its Board. In some cases, it may work for the
   Chair to be the Board champion for the Duty. Firms should apply their
   judgement and set up the role in a way that works for their
   organisation.

   This does not affect the Board’s collective responsibility under the
   Duty or their roles in complying with the Duty under existing
   governance procedures.

   In FG22/5, we have included examples of the types of questions the
   Board champion, or other members of firms’ governing bodies, could ask
   to make sure the firm is meeting expectations under the Duty. These
   questions illustrate the outcome focus of the Duty and are the sorts of
   questions we will ask firms.

   Definition of closed products

   The Duty comes into effect on:
     * 31 July 2023 - for new and existing products or services that are
       open for sale or renewal
--
   Retrospective application

   The Consumer Duty does not apply retrospectively. Both we and the
   Financial Ombudsman Service work on the basis that conduct should be
   judged on the rules and standards in place at that time.
--
   Proportionality

   The Duty applies in a reasonable way. The focus on good customer
   outcomes applies to all aspects of firms’ operations and culture. All
   firms have a Duty to act to deliver good outcomes for their customers.
   What this means in practice will depend on key factors, including:
     * The nature of the product or service. More complicated products are
--
       would expect it to take additional care.
     * The firm’s relationship with its customers. Obligations under the
       Duty reflect the firm’s role and ability to influence retail
       customer outcomes. We would expect firms to focus on harms that are
       reasonably foreseeable.
--
       same resources or processes as a large firm.

   We set out more on how the Duty applies reasonably in Chapter 4 of
   FG22/5.

   Requirements for firms seeking authorisation

   If your firm is in scope of the Consumer Duty, your application must
   prove that you can comply with the Consumer Duty. We expect your
   application to be tailored to your firm and expressly set out how your
   firm will act to consistently deliver good outcomes to retail
   customers.

   To help us assess whether you can comply with the Consumer Duty you
   should provide all the policies, processes, Management Information (MI)
   and any other materials you have created or rely on to support your
   firm’s compliance with the Consumer Duty. These should include the
   following. This is not an exhaustive list and you may be asked to
   review and amend any documents you submit or create new documents
--
     * root cause identification process

   How the Duty applies to firms throughout the distribution chain

   The Duty applies to all firms with a key role in delivering retail
   customer outcomes, including those with no direct customer
   relationship. For example, it applies to firms that can determine or
--
     * customer support for retail customers

   Where this applies, a firm’s responsibilities under the Duty will
   depend on the firm’s role and level of influence.

   See Chapter 2 of our Finalised Guidance for how the Duty applies across
   the distribution chain.

--

   Firms must also notify us where they become aware that another firm in
   the distribution chain may not be complying with the Duty. This
   expectation is in line with the existing Principle 11 requirement to
   inform us of anything relating to the firm which we reasonably expect
--

   Only firms conducting regulated activities in the UK are within our
   regulatory remit and subject to the Duty.

   Where the distribution chain involves firms in Gibraltar selling
   products or services to UK retail customers, the Duty still applies. It
   applies to those firms whether they have an establishment in the UK or
   operate on a cross-border basis.
--

   Regulated firms should also consider whether including a firm that is
   not subject to the Duty in the distribution chain leads to a risk of
   poor customer outcomes.

--
   Application to non-UK customers

   For firms dealing with non-UK customers, the Duty applies in line with
   the existing regulatory perimeter. Where current rules apply to a UK
   firm dealing with non-UK customers, the Duty will also apply.

   Where the chain includes firms outside the UK, which are not subject to
   the Duty, we recognise that UK firms may not be able to meet elements
   of the Duty to the same degree. A UK product manufacturer may find it
   difficult to obtain information from non-UK distributors about their
   distribution of the product.
--
   circumstances. For example, they could use any information that they do
   have available to support their work. We would not expect UK firms to
   obtain information from firms that are not subject to the Duty.

   Clarifying the scope
--
In this section

   Consumer Duty resources
   How we are using the Consumer Duty

More on Consumer Duty

   Consumer Duty
   PS22/9: A new Consumer Duty
   Inside FCA Podcast: What is the price and value outcome?
   Key milestones (PDF)
--
Latest news

   The FCA’s Consumer Duty will lead to a major shift in financial
   services
   FCA to introduce new Consumer Duty to drive a fundamental shift in
   industry mindset
   One month to go for the Consumer Duty

     * Accessibility
