
     ABSTRACT: The public life of political servants is characterized by
     other duties and obligations than private life. Conflicts can even
     arise between a person's public and private duties. The central
     point of this paper is to examine whether this difference of duties
     can be regarded as an effect of different forms of obligation. Can
     we speak of a particular form of political obligation in the same
--
   All modern societies in some way accept the distinction between legal
   and ethical obligation. The former constitutes an exterior sphere of
   norms and rules, including duties which citizens can be compelled to
   perform by the threat of punishment or other legal consequences, the
   latter concerns the interior sphere of a person's conscience and
--
   change in morals': the evolution of a separate subjective sphere of
   morality within the public ethical life. (1) Legal and moral law oblige
   in different ways and also contain different duties. In modern society,
   legal duties usually take the form of commands and rules. The
   distinguishing characteristic of legal duties and corresponding rights
   is that they can be enforced by an appeal to the law. For the sake of
   certainty and to avoid arbitrariness, the legal system strives to
   formulate duties as unambiguously, completely and consistently as
   possible, and to determine the rules for their enforcement precisely.
   Thus, the question of what a legal obligation is and how the subjects
   under obligation must behave is virtually answered by the legal system
   itself. How to fulfill a moral duty, on the other hand, is considered a
   matter of ethical obligation and left to the conscience of private
   persons. Immanuel Kant thought that the domain of duties could be
   adequately divided into duties that can be the object of legal
   obligation, on the one hand, and duties that only can be the object of
   ethical obligation, on the other. The latter pertains to intentions;
   the former, to external aspects of the action. I think, however, that
--
   between political obligation and democratic political virtue.

   1. Moral duty and political necessity

   Machiavelli is the most famous political theorist to argue that, in the
--
   is morally good and wrong are the same for both public and private life
   and these domains are not governed by different moral principles, the
   public life of political servants is characterised by other duties than
   those of the individual in private life. There can even be particular
   conflicts between a person's public and private duties. Can this
   difference of duties be regarded as an effect of different forms of
   obligation?

   There is an analytical connection between duty and obligation.
   Obligation often has the same meaning as duty. To be obliged means to
   have a duty. An obligation can also be the act of obliging oneself or
   someone else. In that case, a duty is the conception of some behaviour
   as the object of an obligation. Generally, we can say that people are
   obliged to perform their duty. Determining the grounds on which this
   general obligation is founded ultimately is a difficult philosophical
   question. But is seems clear that there cannot be an obligation without
   a will imposing a duty or an obliging will. The person or entity that
   imposes an obligation is called the author and the obliged person is
   the subject of the obligation. From the point of view of their origins,
--
   the case of legal obligation, which can be enforced by an external
   authority, we are obliged by the will of another person: the lawgiver
   as the author of the obligation. To the extent that a moral duty cannot
   be enforced by an external authority, the moral necessity has the
   character of an ethical obligation. A moral duty, therefore, can be the
   object of either legal or ethical obligation.

--
   Under normal circumstances, all citizens ought to behave in conformity
   with their conscientious interpretation of the law. This obligation to
   obey can be understood as a moral duty, the explanation of which does
   not need a special conception of political obligation, as distinct from
   legal or ethical obligation. This seems true as long as the state does
   not ask of its citizens an extraordinary readiness to make sacrifices
   or to take special responsibilities. But political obligation is also
   associated with a duty to defend your country, to fight for justice
   and, particularly in war, even to risk your own life. These duties
   cannot always be seen as supererogatory, because under particular
   circumstances citizens and politicians are forced to behave in
--
   prevent the institution of a public order or make the existing legal
   system totally powerless. Under these exceptional circumstances, the
   collective duty, which only implies an ethical obligation for
   individuals, bestows a right on some individuals to take the initiative
   to impose a public order on others or, without the support of valid
--
   with the legally defined and monopolised official mode of exerting
   political power. This is not a case of ethical obligation alone because
   the duty which is the object of political obligation can in some way be
   enforced by the people, either by legal, or by particularly political
   means such as refusal, resistance, and even revolt. In a democratic
--

   Thus, political obligation seems to be a kind of obligation concerning
   the duties of political leaders and citizens together who, as a
   collectivity, are responsible for the political system as a whole. The
   domain of political obligation is situated between ethics and law. The
--
   political leader with a great sense of responsibility for national
   interests and the safety of the state will feel obliged to do things
   that go far beyond the moral duties and rights of private persons in
   daily life. Taking great responsibilities is a praiseworthy thing in
   people who have the capacities to take them. Political merit
--
   benefiting, the obligations of public offices must be clearly defined.

   Public servants have an official duty to do what the legal political
   system wants. They have this duty insofar as they themselves are a
   functional part of the system. This functional relationship is not
   characterised by what I would call a lien of political obligation,
   because its duties are defined by formal rules and legal obligation.
   The duty to perform their tasks in a formally prescribed impersonal and
   detached manner relieves civil servants of too many burdensome moral
   worries. But an excessive devotion to formal duty can also make
   officials blind to other moral requirements. Of course, corruption is
   objectionable. But our focus on corruption must not lead us to forget
