   [INS: :INS]

Difference Between Duties and Responsibilities

   duty vs responsibility Duty and Responsibility are wider terms, which
   are used in a number of contexts, say in the field of law, management,
   education, ethics and so forth. These are commonly used with one
   another, but they are two different terms, wherein the duty is imposed
   on someone, to perform something which is morally, legally or
   professionally considered right. It is something which we are required
--
   accountable for or blamed for its performance and completion or
   non-completion. In this article we are going to talk about the
   difference between duties and responsibilities, have a look.

Content: Duty Vs Responsibility

    1. Comparison Chart
--
Comparison Chart

   Basis for Comparison Duty Responsibility
   Meaning Duty implies an obligation or moral commitment which an
   individual is expected to perform. Responsibility refers to the
   liability which is assumed or accepted by a person, as a part of his
--
   [INS: :INS]

Definition of Duty

   Duty can be defined as a moral, legal, or professional obligation which
   a person is bound to do, otherwise, he/she has to face certain
   punishment or penalty. It determines what a person should have done in
   the normal course of action in general or in specific circumstances.

   The law governing the country has specified certain duties which must
   be followed by every citizen. It exhibits an invisible force which
   binds a person to do something which is considered right in the eyes of
   law, whose non-performance may result in fine or punishment.

   Duty is the obligatory task, conduct, work or service, that emerge out
   of an individual’s position, occupation or role.

   In management, the word ‘duty’ is used to define the tasks or functions
   which an employee has to perform, as it is a part of his/her job.

   In economics, duty is described as a form of tax levied by the
   government on the goods purchased from or sold to foreign countries.
   The non-payment of such taxes may result in a penalty to the exporter
--
   accordingly.

Key Differences Between Duty and Responsibility

   The points given below are substantial so far as the difference between
   duty and responsibility is concerned:
    1. Duty refers to the legal or moral obligation, or commitment towards
       certain work, which you are expected to perform, in general, or
       special circumstances. On the contrary, responsibility refers to
--
       voluntarily accepted or promised, by an individual, inherent to
       his/her job or role.
    2. Duties show a hidden binding force that impels a person to do a
       certain act, which is regarded as the right thing to do in a
       particular situation. As against, responsibility brings authority,
       i.e. the power to take necessary decisions and actions and give
       proper directions for the successful completion.
    3. Duties exhibits respect, sincerity, of the person towards the work
       (task), elders and superiors and obedience. Conversely,
       Responsibility gives birth to accountability, i.e. acceptance of
       certain responsibility by a person makes him/her accountable for
       its performance.
    4. Duty requires the sacrifice of self-interest by the person to whom
       it is ascribed. In contrast, responsibility demands trustworthiness
       and loyalty, i.e. the person to whom the responsibility of a
       certain task is given must be trustworthy and loyal to perform the
       tasks as required.
    5. Duties are imputed on a person, either naturally or out of the
       role/position he occupies. On the other hand, responsibility is
       nothing but demanded duties, which are shouldered on a person who
       is competent and conscientious enough to handle it.

Conclusion

   Duty brings responsibility, i.e. when you say it is your duty, it
   indicates that you ought to do that because you are responsible for
   that act if it is not done properly, within the reasonable time. It
   requires allegiance on the part of the concerned individual, for the
   discharge of duties and responsibilities successfully.
   [INS: :INS]

