   #alternate alternate alternate

   Skip to main content

   European Commission logo
   English
   Select your language
   (BUTTON) Close
     * bgбългарски
     * esespañol
     * csčeština
     * dadansk
     * deDeutsch
     * eteesti
     * elελληνικά
     * enEnglish
     * frfrançais
     * gaGaeilge
     * hrhrvatski
     * ititaliano
     * lvlatviešu
     * ltlietuvių
     * humagyar
     * mtMalti
     * nlNederlands
     * plpolski
     * ptportuguês
     * roromână
     * skslovenčina
     * slslovenščina
     * fisuomi
     * svsvenska

   Search
   Search ____________________
   (BUTTON) Search
   Business, Economy, Euro
   Taxation and Customs Union

   Menu

   (BUTTON) Close
   Menu
   (BUTTON) Back (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
     * Home
     * Taxation (BUTTON)
          + Corporate Taxation
          + International affairs
          + Decision making on EU Tax Policy
          + Company taxation
          + Value added tax (VAT)
          + VAT and Administrative Cooperation
          + Excise duties
          + Tax Co-operation and control
          + Economic analysis of taxation
          + Personal taxation
          + Other taxes
          + Central Electronic System of Payment information (CESOP)
          + National tax administrations
          + Conferences and events
          + EU Training
          + Legislation
          + Glossary
     * Customs (BUTTON)
          + AEO (Authorised Economic Operator)
          + Prohibitions and Restrictions
          + Calculation of customs duties
          + Customs controls
          + Customs Laboratories
          + EU Customs strategy
          + Customs Procedures for import and export
          + Union Customs code
          + Customs security
          + Customs Risk Management
          + International affairs
          + Legislation
          + National customs administrations
          + EU Training
          + Glossary
          + Customs cooperation
          + Electronic customs
     * Online services (BUTTON)
          + Online services and databases for Customs
          + Online services and databases for Taxation
     * Tenders and grants
     * News
     * Events

    1. Home
    2. Buying goods online coming from a non-European Union country

Buying goods online coming from a non-European Union country

   Page contents
   (BUTTON)

   In recent years, the ease of ordering online from our own homes has
   made e-commerce one of the most popular ways for EU consumers to
   purchase goods. When you buy goods online that are already located in
   the EU at the time of sale, there are no customs formalities and
   Value-Added Tax (VAT) is already included in the final price you pay at
   checkout. However, consumers should be aware that ordering goods online
   that are located outside the EU at the time of sale, will result in a
   customs declaration being made and may result in customs duties and
   handling fees being incurred. Furthermore, import VAT may be charged to
   the consumer on delivery if the seller of the goods has not already
   charged VAT on the product and remitted it via the EU Import One Stop
   Shop.

Ordering goods online that are dispatched from a non-EU country

   When you buy a product from a non-EU country, VAT is payable on your
   purchase irrespective of the value of the goods. In addition to VAT,
   you may also have to pay customs duties for goods above €150 and excise
   duty for specific goods. If the terms of sale do not specify another
   arrangement, the goods can be held by the customs authority at entry,
   pending the payment of duty and tax, amongst other reasons (if the
   goods are prohibited in the EU, for example).

Possible charges on import

Import VAT

   When you buy online from a non-EU country, VAT must also be paid, just
   as if you ordered goods that are already located within the EU. The VAT
   is either paid at the point of purchase on the website (for example,
   when you buy from a seller who is registered to use the Import One Stop
   Shop for VAT), or the postal operator or courier may collect the VAT
   from you on delivery.

   Information on the VAT, customs duties and other charges due should be
   clearly explained on the website, and if they cannot be calculated in
   advance, you must be informed that additional charges may be payable.
   Ask assistance from the website to estimate how much more money you
   will have to pay and compare the price with other offers. In general,
   traders from non-EU countries selling to consumers in the EU must
   comply with EU law, including EU consumer law.

   One easy way to check if VAT has been included in the price or not is
   to check whether the website is signed up to the EU Import One Stop
   Shop for VAT. If they are, VAT will already have been included in the
   price you have paid at the moment of purchase. Most of the biggest
   online platforms have signed up to the Import One Stop Shop.

Customs clearance fees

   Customs clearance for release for free circulation is the documented
   permission granted by the national customs authority in the EU to allow
   the goods to be used or consumed in the EU. This permission is given to
   the person that declared the goods to customs. For e-commerce goods, it
   is typically a shipping agent (postal operator or courier) that will
   charge you a customs clearance fee for complying with the necessary
   formalities.  The permission is proof that all applicable customs
   formalities have been completed, including the payment of duties, and
   the shipment is free to be used or consumed.

   These charges can vary from company to company. An overview of charges
   applied by Universal Service Providers for postal services in the EU as
   of June 2022 is available here.

   Goods for which you do not have to pay customs duties (e.g. with total
   value lower than €150) are also subject to customs clearance.

   Customs officers examine packages arriving from outside the EU in order
   to:
     * control goods that are not allowed or restricted in the EU
     * confirm that the description and value stated on the customs
       declaration is correct and
     * check the Customs Declaration to determine if customs duty, excise
       duty and/or Import VAT are chargeable.

Excise duties

   Depending on the goods you order, you may receive an invoice for excise
   duties from the customs authorities, your postal operator or the
   courier. This invoice must be paid before the goods are handed over to
   you.

   See how excise duties are  calculated in the EU Member States.

Warning

   Some commercial websites may offer to show a value on the customs
   declaration that is much lower than the actual price paid so that you
   don't have to pay duty and/or pay lower VAT. This may also result in
   seizure of the goods and/or additional costs and possible a fine at
   delivery.

VAT in detail

   Import VAT is calculated as a percentage (VAT rate) of the taxable
   amount. The VAT rate is the one applicable in the country where the
   goods are being delivered. You can check the VAT rates applied on
   various goods in each country through the Taxes in Europe database.

   The VAT taxable amount is made up of the customs value plus taxes,
   duties, levies and other charges, such as shipping and insurance costs.
   Remember: the import VAT may either be included in the overall delivery
   price or not.

   If the import VAT is not included in the price paid to the seller, you
   will have to pay it to the postal company or express courier, or
   directly to the customs if you clear the goods at customs yourself. In
   the latter case, the procedure differs according to the country of
   import.

   If you pay “all inclusive”, you will be paying import VAT to the seller
   when paying the total price at the moment of purchase. But if the
   import VAT is not properly estimated by the seller, or if the seller
   fails to ensure the transfer of this VAT amount to the tax authority,
   national legislation can hold you jointly liable.

     You should check with your national tax administration (national
     links/websites, which has competence in this matter.

Customs duty in detail

   On the basis of the data provided in the customs declaration, the
   supporting documents that accompany it and any information which they
   may request, the competent customs officers determine, impose and
   collect Customs duties that are due.

   Customs duty is typically calculated as a percentage of the customs
   value of the goods:

   The percentage or rate varies depending on the type of goods. You can
   check the tariff applicable in the TARIC database.

   The customs value is based on the price paid for the goods.

   Customs duty is not due for goods, provided directly to the buyer when
   their value does not exceed €150, excluding transport and insurance
   costs. This relief does not apply to perfumes and toilet waters,
   tobacco or tobacco products and alcoholic products which are subject to
   special duty-free limits on the quantity provided.

   In some cases, additional duties may be charged, depending on the
   country of manufacture of the goods. The TARIC database covers all
   measures relating to tariff, commercial and agricultural legislation.

The customs declaration in detail

   The customs declaration provides information to the customs authorities
   about the goods that you are importing. This declaration must be
   submitted by a person established in the EU or their representative who
   is able to present the goods to customs. This person is typically the
   buyer (i.e. the importer) that ordered the goods..

   If you are the person who submits the customs declaration, a courier
   company may offer to make the declaration on your behalf, but there is
   normally a charge for this service. If you are not the person who
   submits the customs declaration, you should verify with the supplier
   that it is submitted. The customs declaration should indicate correctly
   the nature of the goods and their value not taking into account taxes,
   charges, transport or other additional costs.

   It is in the customer's own interest to make sure that the declaration
   has been submitted and is accurate. If no declaration is made, or the
   information in it was found to be inaccurate, the acceptance of the
   declaration, and thus the delivery of the package to you may be delayed
   or even not take place as the customs officials are entitled to make
   further enquiries and impose penalties and sanctions.

   The customs authority carrying out the customs clearance is entitled to
   open and examine any package if it considers this appropriate. Packages
   might even be seized by customs and, when appropriate, destroyed.

Excise duty in detail

   Excise duties are indirect taxes on the sale or use of specific
   products, such as alcohol and tobacco, and are payable on these goods
   on entry into the EU. EU legislation sets out only minimum levels of
   excise duty above which individual Member States are free to set their
   own rates. You can check the excise duty rates applied on the goods
   concerned through the Taxes in Europe database. Besides the list of
   excise products at EU level, Member States have national lists of
   excise products with their own excise rates, which may vary from one
   Member State to another. The goods will be held by the Customs
   Authority at entry into your country, pending the payment of excise
   duty.

     You should check with your national tax administration (national
     links/websites), which has the competence in this matter.

   For a full overview of the EU countries and certain territories where
   EU rules regulating customs, VAT and excise apply or do not apply,
   please check here.

   Share this page

Taxation and Customs Union

   This site is managed by: Directorate-General for Taxation and Customs
   Union

Contact us

     * Contact us

Follow us

     * Twitter
     * LinkedIn
     * YouTube

About us

     * Newsletter
     * Glossary
     * Our department

Related sites

     * Have your say

   More information on:
     * Business, Economy, Euro

   European Commission logo
     * Contact the European Commission
     * Follow the European Commission on social media
     * Resources for partners

     * Languages on our websites
     * Cookies
     * Privacy policy
     * Legal notice
