   #prev up next

   Skip to main content Skip to local navigation Skip to main content Skip
   to global navigation Skip to footer

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-WT4KDF3

   Ontario Human Rights Commission

Ontario Human Rights Commission

Language selector

     * English
     * Français

Search

   Search _______________
   Search

OHRC Social Links

   Facebook logo. Link to OHRC Facebook page Twitter logo. Link to OHRC
   Twitter page Instagram logo Link to OHRC Instagram page

Main Navigation

     * Your Rights
          + The Ontario Human Rights Code
          + The Human Rights System
          + The Ontario Human Rights Commission
          + The Human Rights Legal Support Centre
          + The Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario
          + Frequently asked questions
     * Code Grounds
          + Age
          + Creed
          + Disability
          + Family and marital status
          + Gender identity and gender expression
          + Race and related grounds
          + Receipt of public assistance
          + Record of offences
          + Sex
          + Sexual orientation
     * Social Areas
          + Contracts
          + Employment
          + Goods, services and facilities
          + Housing
          + Membership in vocational associations and trade unions
     * Education & Outreach
          + eLearning
          + Webinars
          + Teaching human rights in Ontario
          + Public education requests
     * Our Work
          + The OHRC at 60
          + Backgrounders and research
          + Brochures, fact sheets and guides
          + COVID-19
          + Inquiries
          + Legal
          + Letters
          + Papers and reports
          + Policies and guidelines
          + Submissions

You are here

   Home » Policy on ableism and discrimination based on disability » 8.
   Duty to accommodate

Policy on ableism and discrimination based on disability

     * 1. Introduction
     * 2. What is disability?
     * 3. Legal framework
     * 4. Intersecting grounds
     * 5. Establishing discrimination
     * 6. Forms of discrimination
     * 7. Reprisal
     * 8. Duty to accommodate
     * 9. Undue hardship
     * 10. Other limits on the duty to accommodate
     * 11. Preventing and responding to discrimination
     * Appendix A: Purpose of this policy

8. Duty to accommodate

Page controls

     * Printer-friendly version
     * + show tags
     *

Book Prev / Next Navigation
       Previous
       Next

Tags

   Organizational responsibility:
   duty to accommodate

Page content

   Under the Code, employers and unions, housing providers and service
   providers have a legal duty to accommodate the needs of people with
   disabilities who are adversely affected by a requirement, rule or
   standard. Accommodation is necessary to ensure that people with
   disabilities have equal opportunities, access and benefits. Employment,
   housing, services and facilities should be designed inclusively and
   must be adapted to accommodate the needs of a person with a disability
   in a way that promotes integration and full participation.

   In the context of employment, the Supreme Court of Canada has described
   the goals and purposes of accommodation:

     ... the goal of accommodation is to ensure that an employee who is
     able to work can do so. In practice, this means that the employer
     must accommodate the employee in a way that, while not causing the
     employer undue hardship, will ensure that the employee can work. The
     purpose of the duty to accommodate is to ensure that persons who are
     otherwise fit to work are not unfairly excluded where working
     conditions can be adjusted without undue hardship.

                                     …

     The test is not whether it was impossible for the employer to
     accommodate the employee's characteristics. The employer does not
     have a duty to change working conditions in a fundamental way, but
     does have a duty, if it can do so without undue hardship, to arrange
     the employee's workplace or duties to enable the employee to do his
     or her work.^[120]

   Requirements under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
   Disabilities provide that States Parties, including Canada, must take
   steps to make sure that people with disabilities are provided with
   accommodation (for example, to ensure equal access to justice,
   education and employment).^[121]

   The duty to accommodate has both a substantive and a procedural
   component. The procedure to assess an accommodation (the process) is as
   important as the substantive content of the accommodation (the
   accommodation provided).^[122] In a case involving the accommodation of
   a mental health disability in the workplace, the court said: “a failure
   to give any thought or consideration to the issue of accommodation,
   including what, if any, steps could be taken constitutes a failure to
   satisfy the ‘procedural’ duty to accommodate.”^[123]

   In Ontario, it is clear that a failure in the procedural duty to
   accommodate can lead to a finding of a breach of the Code even if there
   was no substantive accommodation that could have been provided short of
   undue hardship. Failure to perform either component of the duty is a
   failure to carry out the duty to accommodate.^[124]

   Moreover, an organization will not be able to argue persuasively that
   providing accommodation would cause undue hardship if it has not taken
   steps to explore accommodation solutions, and otherwise fulfil the
   procedural component of the duty to accommodate.^[125]

     Example: In one case, a human rights tribunal upheld a claim of
     discrimination against a housing co-op when it failed to investigate
     what was required to accommodate a woman and her children who were
     experiencing asthma due to mould allergies in their apartment unit.
     Instead of accepting that the woman had a legitimate problem, the
     co-op was adversarial and treated her as if she was a “loony tune.”
     The co-op also did not respond to her legitimate request to be moved
     to another unit. Instead, it chose not to communicate with her after
     it suggested that her family move out, except to send a threatening
     letter from the co-op’s lawyers.^[126]

8.1 Principles of accommodation

   The duty to accommodate is informed by three principles: respect for
   dignity, individualization, as well as integration and full
   participation.

8.1.1 Respect for dignity

   The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities states
   “…discrimination against any person on the basis of disability is a
   violation of the inherent dignity and worth of the human person.”^[127]

   The duty to accommodate people with disabilities means accommodation
   must be provided in the way that most respects the dignity of the
   person, if doing so does not cause undue hardship. Human dignity
   encompasses individual self-respect, self-worth and inherent worth as a
   human being. It includes physical and psychological integrity and
   empowerment. It is harmed when people are marginalized, stigmatized,
   ignored or devalued. Privacy, confidentiality, comfort, individuality
   and self-esteem are all important factors.

   Respect and support for a person’s autonomy is also crucial. It
   reflects a person’s right to self-determination, to be treated without
   paternalism, and means subjecting people to minimal interference in
   their choices. Consideration needs to be given to how accommodation is
   provided and the person’s own participation in the process.

   Respect for dignity includes being considered as a whole person, not
   merely in relation to one’s disability. It includes respecting and
   valuing the perspectives of people with disabilities, particularly when
   people speak about their own experiences.

   Housing providers, service providers and employers should consider
   different ways of accommodating people with disabilities along a
   continuum, ranging from ways that most respect dignity and other human
   rights values, to those that least respect those values.

     Example: An accommodation that shows little respect for the dignity
     of a person with a disability is an accessible entrance over a
     loading dock or through a service area or garbage room. People who
     use mobility devices should have the same opportunity as others to
     enter a building in a pleasant and convenient manner.

8.1.2 Individualization

   There is no set formula for accommodating people identified
   by Code grounds. Each person’s needs are unique and must be considered
   afresh when an accommodation request is made. People sharing the same
   condition often experience it in very different ways, with different
   symptoms, limitations and prognoses. In terms of accommodation, what
   might work for one person may not work for another.^[128]

     Example: The Supreme Court of Canada found that a workplace
     attendance standard that defined a maximum period for employee
     absences was prima facie discriminatory in part because it did not
     take into account the individualized nature of the accommodation
     process.^^[129]

   Accommodations may need to be re-visited over time to make sure that
   they continue to meet a person’s needs appropriately.

8.1.3 Integration and full participation

   Accommodations should be developed and implemented with a view to
   maximizing a person’s integration and full participation. Achieving
   integration and full participation requires barrier-free and inclusive
   design, as well as removing existing barriers. Where barriers continue
   to exist because it is impossible to remove them at a given point in
   time, then accommodations should be provided, up to the point of undue
   hardship.

     Example: A children’s swimming program at a community centre assigns
     an additional instructor to a class that includes a boy who has
     autism, at his parents’ request. This allows the boy to get the
     extra support he needs to access the service within the regular
     program.

   Employment, housing, services and facilities should be built, and must
   be adapted, to accommodate the needs of a person with a disability in a
   way that promotes their integration and full participation.

   It is well-established in human rights law that equality may sometimes
   require different treatment that does not offend the person’s dignity.
   In some circumstances, the best way to ensure the equality of people
   with disabilities may be to provide separate or specialized services.
   However, it should be kept in mind that segregated treatment in
   services, employment or housing for people with disabilities is less
   dignified and is unacceptable, unless it can be shown that integrated
   treatment would pose undue hardship or that segregation is the only way
   to achieve equality.^^[130]

8.2 Inclusive design

   Ensuring integration and full participation means designing society and
   structures for inclusiveness. Inclusive or “universal”
   design^[131] emphasizes barrier-free environments and equal
   participation of persons with disabilities with varying levels of
   ability. It is a preferred approach to removing barriers or making
   “one-off” accommodations, which assume that existing structures may
   only need slight modifications to make them acceptable.

   The right to equality can be breached by a failure to address the needs
   of disadvantaged groups. As the Supreme Court of Canada has observed:

     [T]he principle that discrimination can accrue from a failure to
     take positive steps to ensure that disadvantaged groups benefit
     equally from services offered to the general public is widely
     accepted in the human rights field^.[132]

   Effective inclusive design will minimize the need for people to ask for
   individualized accommodation. As the Law Commission of Ontario has
   said:

     The concept of universal design, which requires those who develop or
     provide laws, policies, programs or services to take into account
     diversity from the outset, is connected to the principle of autonomy
     and independence in that, when properly implemented, universal
     design removes from persons with disabilities the burden of
     navigating onerous accommodation processes and negotiating the
     accommodations and supports that they need in order to live
     autonomously and independently. In this way, the principle of
     autonomy and independence is closely linked to that of participation
     and inclusion.”^^[133]

   The Supreme Court has noted the need to “fine-tune” society so that
   structures and assumptions do not exclude persons with disabilities
   from taking part in society.^^[134] It has affirmed that standards
   should be designed to reflect all members of society, to the extent
   that this is reasonably possible.^^[135] Housing providers, service
   providers, employers and others need to build in conceptions of
   equality to standards or requirements.^^[136] This proactive approach
   is more effective because it emphasizes accessibility and inclusion
   from the start.

   Organizations, including government, should use the principles of
   inclusive design when they are developing and building policies,
   programs, procedures, standards, requirements and facilities.

     Example: A municipal community centre installs visual fire alarms in
     all of its buildings to ensure that people who are deaf, deafened or
     hard of hearing are able to identify emergency situations.

     Example: Voters and candidates with disabilities have the right to
     accommodation during elections.^[137] Leading up to a provincial
     by-election, the election office procures only accessible facilities
     for polling stations.^[138] Accessibility standards^[139] are
     specified in facility rental agreements and accessible voting
     equipment and services are available so that people with
     disabilities can vote independently on election day. Local riding
     associations follow similar accessibility standards when selecting
     locations for all-candidate debates and all parties agree to share
     the costs of sign language interpreters and captioning to make sure
     voters and candidates with hearing disabilities can participate
     equally.^[140]

   New barriers should never be created when designing new structures or
   revising old ones.^[141] Organizations that knowingly create new
   barriers for people with disabilities, or take steps that perpetuate
   existing barriers, may violate the Code. Design plans should
   incorporate current accessibility standards such as the Principles of
   Universal Design.^^[142] This type of planning decreases the need to
   remove barriers and provide accommodations at a later date.

     Example: The entrance to a convenience store included four steps up
     to the front door, the store’s only public entrance. As a result,
     people who use wheelchairs, scooters, strollers and people who have
     other types of mobility disabilities could not access the store.
     Despite a major renovation to the building that included significant
     changes to its store-front, the owner neglected to install a ramp or
     an automatic door-opener to make the premises physically accessible
     to everyone.

     Example: A television production company implements a scent-free
     policy throughout its workplace. Wherever possible, it avoids the
     use of chemical agents and makes conscious efforts to seek out less
     toxic materials in its business operations. It conducts training on
     environmental sensitivities for its managers and staff, and informs
     its clients about its policy.

   The Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities Act^^[143] provides a
   mechanism for developing, implementing and enforcing accessibility
   standards with the goal of a fully accessible province by 2025.
   Standards have already been passed into regulation for customer
   service, employment, information and communication, transportation and
   public spaces. Changes have also been made to the accessibility
   provisions of the Building Code Regulation.^[144] Under the AODA,
   government public and private sector employers, service providers and
   landlords are required to comply with accessibility standards in
   varying degrees over time relative to an organization’s size and
   sector. If accessibility standards under the AODA fall short of
   requirements under the Code in a given situation, the requirements of
   the Code will prevail.^[145]

   Along with the expectation to prevent barriers at the design stage
   through inclusive design, organizations should be aware of systemic
   barriers in systems and structures that already exist. They should
   actively identify and seek to remove these existing barriers.

     Example: A school board reviews its website to identify possible
     barriers for people with disabilities. It unlocks several design
     elements so that people with low vision can increase the font size
     on their desktops and “pinch" or zoom in closer on their mobile
     devices. It adds descriptive text tags to logos and images for users
     with very limited or no vision. It also modifies the presentation of
     the website’s content to ensure high colour contrast and clear
     “focus order.” This allows people with low vision and people who use
     assistive technologies to more easily access the information and
     navigate through content.

   Organizations will likely find that inclusive design choices and
   barrier removal make good business sense and will benefit large numbers
   of people. Features installed to ensure that services or residences are
   accessible to people with disabilities also have the potential to meet
   people’s needs as they age, and allow people to “age in
   place.”^[146] Offering a range of alternative communication methods
   when providing services will benefit many people with different needs,
   including people with speech and language disabilities, and people who
   identify as deaf, deafened or hard of hearing.^[147]

8.3 Appropriate accommodation

   In addition to designing inclusively and removing barriers,
   organizations must respond to individual requests for accommodation.
   The duty to accommodate requires that the most appropriate
   accommodation be determined and provided, unless this causes undue

   hardship. Accommodation is considered appropriate if it results in
   equal opportunity to enjoy the same level of benefits and privileges
   experienced by others or if it is proposed or adopted for the purpose
   of achieving equal opportunity, and meets the individual’s
   disability-related needs. The most appropriate accommodation is one
   that most:
     * respects dignity
     * responds to a person’s individualized needs
     * allows for integration and full participation.

   Accommodation is a process and is a matter of degree, rather than an
   all-or-nothing proposition, and can be seen as a continuum. The highest
   point in the continuum of accommodation must be achieved, short of
   undue hardship.^^[148] At one end of this continuum is full
   accommodation that most respects the person's dignity and promotes
   confidentiality. Alternative accommodation (which would be less than
   “ideal”) might be next on the continuum when the most appropriate
   accommodation is not feasible. An alternative (or “next-best”)
   accommodation may be implemented in the interim while the most
   appropriate accommodation is being phased in or put in place at a later
   date when resources have been put aside.

   Determining the “most appropriate” accommodation is a separate analysis
   from determining whether the accommodation would result in undue
   hardship. If a particular accommodation measure would cause undue
   hardship, the next-best accommodation must be sought.

   At the same time, human rights case law makes it clear that the purpose
   of the Code is to accommodate a person’s needs, not their
   preferences.^[149] If there is a choice between two accommodations that
   respond equally to the person’s needs in a dignified way, then the
   accommodation provider is entitled to select the one that is less
   expensive or less disruptive to the organization.^[150]

8.3.1 Essential duties and requirements

   Section 17 of the Code says that the right to be free from
   discrimination is not infringed if the person with a disability is
   incapable of performing or fulfilling the essential duties or
   requirements attending the exercise of the right.

   In employment, essential duties are the “vital” or “indispensable”
   aspects of someone’s job. In housing, the essential duties or
   requirements of being a tenant may include paying rent, maintaining
   one’s unit so it does not violate health and safety laws, and allowing
   other people to reasonably enjoy their premises. In the case of
   services, the “essential duties or requirements” of using a service
   will vary depending on the circumstances.

   Section 17 means that someone cannot be judged incapable of performing
   the essential duties of a job, or the essential requirements of being a
   tenant or taking part in a service, unless it can be shown that the
   person’s needs cannot be accommodated

   without undue hardship. An organization should not conclude that a
   person is unable to perform the essential duties without actually
   giving the person an opportunity to demonstrate their ability.

     Example: A doctor enrolled in a residency program required
     accommodation of his ADHD and other disabilities to complete his
     rotations within various teaching hospitals and community practices.
     A human rights tribunal found that he was discriminated against by
     the university offering the program when the university decided,
     based on an “impressionistic conclusion”, that providing the
     accommodation would fundamentally alter the program or lower its
     professional standards. There must be a substantive factual
     foundation to support a conclusion that a person cannot meet an
     essential requirement of a program.^[151]

     Example: After coming back from a disability-related leave, a man
     returned to modified duties. Even though his doctor cleared him to
     go back to work full-time, his employer placed him in a lower,
     part-time position at a lower pay rate. He was eventually terminated
     from his employment. The HRTO found that the employer failed to meet
     both its procedural and substantive duty to accommodate. The
     employer violated the Code when it based its decision to place the
     employee in a lower-paying position on its belief about the
     applicant’s ability to perform in the workplace, and continued to
     refuse to provide full-time work, even though this was supported by
     the employee’s doctor. The employer relied on its “non-expert
     opinion” and “stereotypes.” It incorrectly relied on assumptions
     that the employee could not withstand the pressures of his job, and
     that his performance would be unreliable because of his past medical
     condition.^[152]

   It is not enough for the organization to assume that a person cannot
   perform an essential requirement of a job, tenancy,
   service, etc. Rather, there must be an objective determination of that
   fact.^^[153] To this end, an individualized assessment will be
   necessary.^[154]

   The duty to accommodate does not require exempting a person from
   performing the essential duties of the job,^[155] requirements of the
   service, etc. In the context of employment, the duty to accommodate
   does not require an employer to fundamentally change the working
   conditions of employees, assign the essential duties of an employee
   with a disability to other employees or change the essential duties and
   requirements of a position.^[156] In these cases, a next-best solution,
   such as alternative work, may need to be found.

     Example: A delivery truck driver’s duties included loading skids of
     product onto a truck, and unloading them at his destination. He
     worked for a small operation whose staff consisted of the owner and
     his wife, a warehouse employee and the delivery truck driver. Due to
     a back injury, the driver was not able to load and unload the truck,
     an essential duty of his job. He requested light duties, preferably
     office work, or relief from loading and unloading the truck. The
     employer denied this request because there were no light duties
     available, and he could not hire an additional person to help the
     driver. The HRTO found that the duty to accommodate does not require
     an employer to assign the essential duties of an employee with a
     disability to other employees or to hire another employee to perform
     them in the employee's place. An employer is also not required to
     change the essential duties and requirements of a position so that
     an employee can meet them.^[157]

8.3.2 Employment-specific accommodation issues

8.3.2.1 Alternative work

   There is a duty to accommodate a person in their pre-disability job
   wherever possible. However, it is recognized that this may not always
   be feasible. Human rights case law recognizes that employers have a
   duty to consider temporary and permanent alternative work for people
   who can no longer remain in their position even with
   accommodation.^[158] This duty includes diligently investigating
   positions and proposing job options^[159] that are within the person’s
   functional limitations.^[160]

   Accommodation may include job restructuring, job
   bundling,^[161] reassignment to open positions, or retraining for
   alternative positions if that would not constitute undue hardship for
   the employer. Employers should canvass available posts that allow the
   employee to maximize his or her skills and abilities.^[162]

   Temporary alternative work

   The term "alternative work" means different work or work that does not
   necessarily involve similar skills, responsibilities and
   compensation.^[163] Temporary alternative work may be an appropriate
   accommodation either in a return to work context, or in a situation
   where a disability renders an employee temporarily unable to accomplish
   the pre-disability job. Temporary alternative work can be an
   appropriate accommodation to assist a person where the nature of the
   disability and its limitations are temporary or episodic.

   Permanent alternative work

   When an employee asks to be reinstated in a previous position, the
   employer must make the appropriate inquiries to assess whether the
   employee is fully able to carry out the essential functions of the job.
   The returning employee must be given an opportunity to prove his or her
   ability to perform the pre-disability job.^[164] Where the employee can
   no longer perform the pre-disability job, with or without
   accommodation, the employer should consider permanent alternative
   work.^[165]

   The duty to accommodate may include some workplace
   reorganization.^[166] For example, it may require employers to consider
   placing an employee with a disability into a vacant position without
   requiring that person to compete for the position.^[167] The vacant
   position must be vacant within a reasonable amount of time, but the
   employer is not required to “promote” the employee. To the greatest
   extent possible, the vacant position must be equivalent to the current
   one. When reassignment takes place, the person must be qualified for
   the reassigned position.

     Example: An employee with a disability returns from a disability
     leave and is considered for alternative work. There are two other
     positions available at the company. He is generally qualified for
     one of these positions, but does not know how to use a computer
     program that is required to do the essential duties of this job. The
     employer sends the person on a training course to learn the computer
     program. The employee is then qualified for the position.

   The duty to accommodate does not require the employer to completely
   alter the essence of the contract of employment, that is, the
   employee’s duty to perform work in exchange for remuneration.^[168] The
   duty to accommodate does not require an employer to provide “make work”
   or “to create a job that is not productive or that, in the employer’s
   view, does not need to be done.”^[169] Nor is an employer required to
   employ two employees to do the job of one.^[170] In the final analysis,
   the employee must be able to perform a useful and productive job for
   the employer.^[171]

8.3.2.2 Return to work

   Accommodating a person who has been absent from work may involve any of
   the above forms of accommodation but also raises unique issues. People
   who return to work after an absence related to a Code ground are
   protected by the Code.^[172] They generally have the right to return to
   their original job (the pre-disability job). Both employers and unions
   must co-operate in accommodating employees who are returning to work.
   Accommodation is a fundamental and integral part of the right to equal
   treatment in the return to work context.^[173]

     Example: In one case, a woman who had been off for several months
     for a series of surgeries informed her employer that she planned to
     return to work. The HRTO found that her employer discriminated
     against her when it required her to provide a “clean bill of
     health,” tried to require her to sign a letter agreeing to a finite
     cap on future medical leave, and asked her to complete a retraining
     period before it would consider whether she could return to work.
     The HRTO affirmed that the woman was entitled to her previous job.
     The employer acted in a discriminatory way when it merely offered to
     consider rehiring her.^[174]

   The right of people with disabilities to return to work exists if the
   worker can fulfil the essential duties of the job after accommodation
   short of undue hardship.^[175] If a person cannot fulfil the essential
   duties of the pre-disability job, despite the employer's effort to
   accommodate short of undue hardship, the employer still has an
   obligation to canvass alternative work possibilities, as outlined
   above. Ultimately, as stated above, the person with a disability must
   be able to perform a useful and productive job for the employer.

   Under the Code, there is no fixed rule as to how long an employee with
   a disability may be absent before the duty to accommodate has been met.
   This will depend on the ability of the employee to perform the
   essential duties of the job considering the unique circumstances of
   every absence and the nature of the employee’s condition, as well as
   circumstances in the workplace.^[176] Also important is the
   predictability of the absence, in terms of when it will end, if it may
   recur and the frequency of the absence. The employee’s prognosis and
   length of absence are also important considerations. It is more likely
   that the duty to accommodate will continue with a better prognosis,
   regardless of the length of absence.

   The duty to accommodate does not necessarily guarantee a limitless
   right to return to work.^[177] On the other hand, a return to work
   program that relies on arbitrarily selected cut-offs or that requires
   an inflexible date of return may be challenged as a violation of
   the Code.

     Example: In a case that dealt with a modified work program that
     featured a “90-day” rule that deemed temporary restrictions of more
     than 90 days to be permanent, the HRTO stated: “A general
     employment-related human rights principle is that when an employee
     is temporarily unable to perform a job because of disability, the
     employer is obliged to keep the employee’s job available so that the
     employee can return to it when the disability improves to the point
     the employee can return to the job. This is a form of
     accommodation of the person’s disability related needs. The
     obligation to keep the employee’s job available does not extend
     indefinitely, and is limited by undue hardship involved in keeping
     the job available, but it generally extends for more than three
     months.”^[178]

   Ultimately, the test of undue hardship is the relevant standard for
   assessing return to work programs.

8.4 The legal test

   Section 11 of the Code prohibits discrimination that results from
   requirements, qualifications or factors that may appear neutral but
   that have an adverse effect on people identified by Code grounds.
   Section 11 allows an organization to show that a requirement,
   qualification or factor that results in discrimination is nevertheless
   reasonable and bona fide (legitimate). However, to do this, the
   organization must show that the needs of the person cannot be
   accommodated without undue hardship.^[179]

   The Supreme Court of Canada has set out a framework for examining
   whether the duty to accommodate has been met.^[180] If prima
   facie discrimination (or discrimination on its face) is found to exist,
   a respondent must establish on a balance of probabilities that the
   standard, factor, requirement or rule:
    1. was adopted for a purpose or goal that is rationally connected to
       the function being performed (such as a job, being a tenant, or
       participating in the service)
    2. was adopted in good faith, in the belief that it is necessary for
       the fulfilment of the purpose or goal, and
    3. is reasonably necessary to accomplish its purpose or goal, in the
       sense that it is impossible to accommodate the claimant without
       undue hardship.^[181]

   As a result of this test, the rule or standard itself must be inclusive
   of as many people as possible and must accommodate individual
   differences up to the point of undue hardship. This makes sure that
   each person is assessed according to their own personal
   abilities.^[182] The ultimate issue is whether the organization or
   individual providing accommodation has shown that they have done so up
   to the point of undue hardship.

   The following non-exhaustive factors should be considered during the
   analysis:^[183]
     * whether the accommodation provider investigated alternative
       approaches
       that do not have a discriminatory effect
     * reasons why viable alternatives were not put in place
     * ability to have differing standards that reflect group or
       individual differences and capabilities
     * whether the accommodation provider can meet their legitimate
       objectives in a less discriminatory way
     * whether the standard is properly designed to make sure the desired
       qualification is met without placing undue burden on the people it
       applies to
     * whether other parties who are obliged to assist in the search for
       accommodation have fulfilled their roles.

   Similarly, as mentioned above, section 17 of the Code also creates an
   obligation to accommodate specifically under the ground of disability.

8.5 Forms of accommodation

   Many different methods and techniques will respond to the unique needs
   of people with disabilities. Accommodations may include modifying or
   changing an organization’s:
     * buildings, facilities and services
     * policies and processes
     * procurement and third-party contracts
     * performance standards, conditions and requirements^^[184]
     * decision-making practices
     * work, housing or service culture
     * methods of communication.

   Depending on a person’s individual needs, examples of accommodation may
   include:

   Employment
     * allowing a flexible work schedule^[185]
     * modifying job duties^[186]
     * modifying policies
     * making changes to the building (for example, installing ramps, hand
       rails, automatic door openers, wider doorways, etc.)
     * modifying workstations (making ergonomic changes, supplying a
       specialized chair, back support, etc.)
     * providing specialized adaptation or assistive devices for
       computers, accessible technology
     * providing alternative ways of communicating with the employee
     * additional training
     * allowing short-term and long-term disability leave
     * job bundling and unbundling^[187]
     * alternative work.^[188]

   Services
     * providing multiple ways of contacting a service including by phone,
       in person and by regular and electronic mail
     * providing extra time to a service user
     * providing more breaks to a service user, where appropriate
     * making attendance requirements flexible, where possible, if
       non-attendance can be shown to be linked to a disability
     * modifying rules around non-compliance with deadlines, if
       non-compliance can be shown to be linked to a disability^[189]
     * modifying “no pets” policies to allow guide dogs^[190] and other
       service animals^^[191]
     * considering someone’s disability as a mitigating factor when
       addressing behaviour that would otherwise warrant imposing
       sanctions.^[192]

   Housing
     * helping someone fill out application forms (e.g. for social or
       supportive housing)
     * adjusting tenant selection criteria (such as using a guarantor when
       other information, such as credit history or rental history, is not
       available^[193])
     * modifying deadlines (such as deadlines to report income changes in
       social and supportive housing)
     * modifying ways that information is communicated to tenants
     * establishing a list of contact supports to call in emergency
       situations
     * making structural modifications to units (for example, installing
       ramps, automatic door openers, wider doorways, etc.)
     * working with outside professionals to address someone’s needs, if
       agreed to by the tenant
     * considering someone’s disability as a mitigating factor when
       addressing behaviour that would otherwise warrant imposing
       sanctions^[194]
     * allowing transfers between units.^[195]

   Most accommodations are not expensive to provide, and if instituted
   widely, will benefit more than the person requesting the accommodation.

     Example: A tenant in a rental unit develops arthritis. She requests
     that doorknobs in her suite and in common areas such as the laundry
     room be changed from round knobs that are difficult to grip to
     handles that are suitable for people with arthritis. The landlord
     willingly makes this change as it is not an undue hardship to do so.
     It will also benefit other tenants with disabilities in the
     building, as well as people who are aging.

   Accommodation should be a non-coercive, co-operative process that all
   responsible parties take part in. A person’s co-workers, as well as
   other tenants and service users, may have a role to play in helping
   with an accommodation. In these cases, it may be necessary for others
   to know that a person requires an accommodation to facilitate the
   accommodation. However, care must be taken to protect the person’s
   privacy, to not reveal any more information than is necessary, to make
   sure that they are not “singled out,” and that their dignity is
   respected.^[196]

   An accommodation provider should take steps to resolve any tension or
   conflict that may occur as a result of resentment on the part of others
   who are expected to help implement an accommodation. In some
   situations, tension may be linked to a lack of awareness about the
   nature of the person’s disability or needs and the requirements of
   the Code.

   Keeping in mind that everyone experiences disability differently,
   accommodation providers are also required to educate themselves about
   the nature and impact of disabilities as part of the procedural duty to
   accommodate,^[197] and to dispel any misperceptions or stereotypes that
   employees, other tenants or service staff or users may have about
   people with disabilities^[198] that could lead to inequitable
   treatment. Resolving these issues must be done in a way that most
   respects the person’s dignity and privacy. One key approach to doing
   this is to implement anti-harassment, accommodation and sensitivity
   training. Otherwise, tension and conflict could lead to harassment or a
   poisoned environment for the person with the disability.

8.6 Duties and responsibilities in the accommodation process

   The accommodation process is a shared responsibility. Everyone involved
   should co-operatively engage in the process, share information and
   consider potential accommodation solutions. The person with a
   disability is required to:
     * make accommodation needs known to the best of their ability,
       preferably
       in writing, so that the person responsible for accommodation can
       make the requested accommodation^[199]
     * answer questions or provide information about relevant restrictions
       or limitations, including information from health care
       professionals^[200]
     * take part in discussions about possible accommodation solutions
     * co-operate with any experts whose assistance is required to manage
       the accommodation process or when information is needed that is
       unavailable to
       the person with a disability
     * meet agreed-upon performance standards and requirements, such as
       job standards, once accommodation is provided^^[201]
     * work with the accommodation provider on an ongoing basis to manage
       the accommodation process.

   The accommodation provider is required to:
     * be alert to the possibility that a person may need an accommodation
       even if they have not made a specific or formal request^[202]
     * accept the person’s request for accommodation in good faith, unless
       there are legitimate reasons for acting otherwise
     * get expert opinion or advice where needed (but not as a routine
       matter)
     * take an active role in ensuring that alternative approaches and
       possible accommodation solutions are investigated,^[203] and
       canvass various forms of possible accommodation and alternative
       solutions^[204]
     * keep a record of the accommodation request and action taken
     * communicate regularly and effectively with the person, providing
       updates on the status of the accommodation and planned next
       steps^[205]
     * maintain confidentiality
     * limit requests for information to those reasonably related to the
       nature of the limitation or restriction, to be able to respond to
       the accommodation request
     * consult with the person to determine the most appropriate
       accommodation
     * implement accommodations in a timely way,^[206] to the point of
       undue hardship
     * bear the cost of any required medical information or documentation
       (for example, the accommodation provider should pay for doctors’
       notes, assessments, letters setting out accommodation
       needs, etc.)^[207]
     * bear the cost of required accommodation.

   Although the person seeking accommodation has a duty to assist in
   securing appropriate accommodation that will meet their needs, they are
   not responsible for originating a solution^[208] or leading the
   accommodation process. They are also not required to discuss their
   disability-related needs with anyone other than the people directly
   involved in the accommodation process.^[209] It is ultimately the
   accommodation provider’s responsibility to implement solutions, with
   the co-operation of the person seeking accommodation. After
   accommodation is provided, the person receiving the accommodation is
   expected to fulfil the essential duties or requirements of the job,
   tenancy, or taking part in a service.

   Contracting with a disability management company does not absolve an
   employer of responsibilities or liability if the accommodation process
   is not managed properly.^[210]

   In employment, unions and professional associations are required to
   take an active role as partners in the accommodation process, share
   joint responsibility with the employer to facilitate accommodation, and
   support accommodation measures regardless of collective agreements,
   unless to do so would create undue hardship.^[211]

   If the accommodation is required to allow the person to be able to take
   part in the organization without impediment due to disability, the
   organization must arrange and cover the cost of the accommodation
   needed,^[212] unless this would cause undue hardship.

   Where a person requires assistance for their disability beyond what is
   required to access housing, employment or services equally, such as an
   assistive device for daily living, the organization would not generally
   be required to arrange or pay for it, but is expected to allow the
   person to access this type of accommodation without impediment.

   Accommodating someone with a disability may be hindered by a lack of
   appropriate disability support services in the community to identify
   someone’s disability-related needs and limitations, or to assist with
   an accommodation. Waiting lists for specialists’ assessments, for
   example, can be extremely long. In these cases, accommodation providers
   should use the best information they have available to make the
   accommodation, or provide interim accommodation, taking into
   consideration how the person identifies their own needs, pending the
   assessment.

8.6.1 Duty to inquire about accommodation needs

   In general, the duty to accommodate a disability exists for needs that
   are known or ought to be known. Organizations and persons responsible
   for accommodation are not, as a rule, expected to accommodate
   disabilities they are unaware of. However, in some circumstances, the
   nature of certain disabilities may leave people unable to identify that
   they have a disability, or that they have accommodation needs.^[213]

     Example: A forklift operator is prescribed medication to treat
     seizures. Shortly afterward he begins to experience memory lapses,
     including while on the job, and at one point has difficulty
     recalling the established protocol for the safe operation of his
     machinery. His manager notices his uncharacteristic behaviour.
     Rather than taking disciplinary action, the manager sets up a
     meeting and asks the employee if there have been any recent changes
     in his life that could be affecting his behaviour. The employee is
     able to correlate his memory problems to when he began to take his
     anti-seizure medication. In consultation with his doctor, he
     switches to a new medicine and the problem resolves itself.

   Accommodation providers must attempt to help a person who is clearly
   unwell or perceived to have a disability by inquiring further to see if
   the person has needs related to a disability and offering assistance
   and accommodation.^[214] Even if an employer has not been formally
   advised of a disability, the perception of such a disability will
   engage the protection of the Code.

     Example: The HRTO found that an employer discriminated against a
     male employee with a visual impairment when it failed to inquire
     into whether he needed accommodation even after it became aware that
     he was experiencing difficulties on the job due to his disability.
     Even though the man did not formally request accommodation, the HRTO
     stated “…the procedural duty to accommodate indicates that an
     employer cannot passively wait for an employee to request
     accommodation where it is aware of facts that indicate that the
     employee may be having difficulties because of disability; there is
     a duty to take the initiative to inquire in these
     circumstances.”^[215]

   Where an organization is aware, or reasonably ought to be aware, that
   there may be a relationship between a disability and someone’s job
   performance, or their abilities to fulfil their duties as a tenant or
   service user, the organization has a “duty to inquire” into that
   possible relationship before making a decision that would affect the
   person adversely.^[216] This includes providing a meaningful
   opportunity to the employee, tenant or service user to identify a
   disability and request accommodation. A severe change in
   a person’s behaviour could signal that the situation warrants further
   examination.

   Where a person exhibits inappropriate behaviour due to a disability,
   employers, housing providers and service providers have a duty to
   assess each person individually before imposing measures that may
   affect the person negatively. Such measures might include prematurely
   starting eviction proceedings, revoking subsidies, withdrawing services
   or imposing discipline in employment. Before sanctioning a person for
   misconduct
   or “unacceptable behaviour,” an organization must first consider
   whether the actions of the person are caused by a disability,
   especially where the organization is aware or perceives that the person
   has a disability.^[217] The person’s disability must be considered in
   determining what, if any, sanctions are appropriate, unless this causes
   undue hardship.

     Example: A boy in Grade 2 regularly interrupts his classmates and
     disrupts the teacher’s lessons. When repeated reminders do not
     improve the problem, the teacher considers her options. Before
     escalating the situation, she contacts his parents to make further
     inquiries. Together, they arrange for an educational assessment
     which reveals that the boy has autism spectrum disorder. They are
     then able to take steps to put the appropriate supports in place to
     help him succeed at school.

   Where the behaviour is not related to a disability, sanctions or
   discipline will generally apply, as usual.^[218]

   Accommodation providers should always inform employees, service users
   and tenants that a disability-related assessment (such as a medical
   assessment) or accommodation can be provided as an option to address
   job performance issues or issues relating to fulfilling one’s duties as
   a tenant or a service user.

   In employment, for example, an accommodation provider may be able to
   ask for medical documentation to confirm fitness to work, if there is
   sufficient objective evidence that there are legitimate reasons to be
   concerned.

   Once disability-related needs are known, the legal onus shifts to those
   with the duty to accommodate.^[219] For example, support or referral
   through employee assistance programs (EAPs) could be the solution for
   an underlying disability.

8.7 Medical information to be provided

   The provision of medical information by people with disabilities – the
   type, the scope and to whom – has implications for the privacy of
   employees, tenants and service users.^[220] At the same time,
   organizations must have enough information to allow them to meet their
   duty to accommodate.

   As stated above, the person seeking accommodation is generally required
   to advise the accommodation provider that they have a disability, and
   the accommodation provider is required to take requests for
   accommodation in good faith.^[221] A person with a disability does not
   have to meet an onerous standard for initially communicating that a
   disability exists to trigger the organization’s duty to accommodate.
   Organizations should limit requests for information to those reasonably
   related to the nature of the limitation or restriction, to assess needs
   and make the accommodation.

   The type of information that accommodation seekers may generally be
   expected to provide to support an accommodation includes:
     * that the person has a disability
     * the limitations or needs associated with the disability
     * whether the person can perform the essential duties or requirements
       of the job^[222], of being a tenant, or of being a service user,
       with or without accommodation
     * the type of accommodation(s) that may be needed to allow the person
       to fulfill the essential duties or requirements of the job, of
       being a tenant, or of being a service user, etc.
     * in employment, regular updates about when the person expects to
       come back to work, if they are on leave.

     Example: A tenant tells his landlord that he has been hospitalized
     due to a disability and cannot make his rent payment on time.
     Knowing that the person is in hospital, the landlord does not
     require confirmation that the tenant has a disability, but asks for
     information to indicate that his need is temporary in nature, and
     that he will be able to pay his rent once released in a few weeks’
     time. The person provides this information, and the landlord makes
     an allowance for the late payment.

     Example: In one case, a housing co-op sought to evict an occupant
     for failing to perform the two hours of volunteer work each month
     required by the co-op’s by-law, despite the fact that she had
     provided a doctor’s note that she was incapable of performing the
     volunteer work for medical reasons. Even with the note, the co-op
     sought further medical details of her condition, which she refused
     to provide. The Ontario Divisional Court stated that the co-op had a
     duty to respect the rights of its occupants under the Ontario Human
     Rights Code and to accommodate the needs of an occupant with a
     disability, to the point of undue hardship.^[223]

   Where there is a reasonable basis to question the legitimacy of a
   person’s request for accommodation or the adequacy of the information
   provided, the accommodation provider may request confirmation or
   additional information from a qualified health care professional to get
   the needed information.

   Where more information about a person’s disability is needed, the
   information requested must be the least intrusive of the person’s
   privacy while still giving the accommodation provider enough
   information to make the accommodation.

   In the rare case where an accommodation provider can show that it
   legitimately needs more information about the person’s disability to
   make the accommodation (as opposed to just the needs related to the
   disability), it could ask for the nature of the person’s illness,
   condition or disability^[224] (for example, is it a mental health
   disability, a physical disability, a learning disability?), as opposed
   to a medical diagnosis.

   Organizations are not expected to diagnose illness or “second-guess”
   the health status of a person with a disability. An accommodation
   provider is not entitled to substitute its own opinion for that of
   medical documentation provided by a doctor.^[225] Similarly, an
   organization must not ask for more confidential medical information
   than necessary because it doubts the person’s disclosure of their
   disability based on its own impressionistic view of what a specific
   disability should “look like.”^[226]

     Example: An employee tells his manager that he has Crohn’s Disease
     and requests time off work to recover from an upcoming surgery
     related to his condition. Although the employee provides medical
     documentation from his family doctor stating that he has a
     disability for which he will require 4 – 6 weeks off to recover from
     surgery, his manager questions the legitimacy of the request, saying
     “I have no one to replace you, and besides, my uncle has had Crohn’s
     Disease for years and he has never had to have surgery.” He insists
     on the employee providing confirmation from his surgeon as well
     before he will consider providing the requested accommodation. This
     could be a violation of the employee’s rights under the Code.

   Generally, the accommodation provider does not have the right to know a
   person’s confidential medical information, such as the cause of the
   disability, diagnosis, symptoms or treatment,^[227] unless these
   clearly relate to the accommodation being sought, or the person’s needs
   are complex, challenging or unclear and more information is
   needed.^[228] In rare situations where a person’s accommodation needs
   are complex, challenging or unclear, the person may be asked to
   co-operate by providing more information, up to and including a
   diagnosis.^[229] In such situations, the accommodation provider must be
   able to clearly justify why the information is needed.

   However, wherever possible, an accommodation provider must make genuine
   efforts to provide needed accommodations without requiring a person to
   disclose a diagnosis, or otherwise provide medical information that is
   not absolutely necessary.

     Example: A woman living with HIV provides medical verification that
     she has a disability to her university’s office for students with
     disabilities. The office helps her to set up a schedule that avoids
     early morning classes, due to the insomnia and fatigue she
     experiences as a side effect of her medication. Neither the office
     nor the woman’s professors need to know the exact nature of her
     disability to make this accommodation.

   Where someone’s needs are unclear, they may be asked to attend an
   independent medical examination (IME). However, there must be an
   objective basis for concluding that the initial medical evidence
   provided is inaccurate or inadequate. The IME should not be used to
   “second-guess” a person’s request for accommodation.^[230] Requests for
   medical examinations must be warranted, take into account a person’s
   particular disability-related needs, and respect individual privacy to
   the greatest extent possible.^[231]

     Example: A woman is employed as a railroad engineer, which is a
     “safety sensitive” position. After being hospitalized for a serious
     concussion resulting from a car accident, she is cleared by her
     doctor to go back to work. However, upon returning, she is evaluated
     and her supervisor notices that she cannot focus well, her reaction
     time is slow, and she makes repeated mistakes. In this case, the
     employer may be justified in asking the employee to attend an
     independent medical examination.^[232]

   No one can be made to attend an independent medical examination, but
   failure to respond to reasonable requests may delay the accommodation
   until such information is provided, and may ultimately frustrate the
   accommodation process.

   Mere assertions of symptoms, such as statements that the person
   experiences “stress,” “pain” or “feels unwell” – things that many
   people commonly experience – may not be enough to establish a
   disability within the meaning and protection of human rights
   legislation.^^[233] If choosing to disclose such information in
   writing, individuals and doctors should make it clear that these
   symptoms relate to a disability.

     Example: A man provides a doctor’s note to his employer stating that
     he has been feeling “under the weather” and needs a leave of
     absence. The employer is entitled to ask for more information to
     ascertain whether his condition is linked to a disability. If it is,
     the employer may ask about the person’s restrictions, the expected
     date of return to work, and whether or not the person could still be
     present at work with an accommodation.

   However, where these types of assertions exist alongside other
   indicators that the person is experiencing health problems, and where
   an employer, housing provider or service provider perceives that a
   person may have a disability, the Code’s protection will be triggered.

   Where a person provides disability-related information that an
   accommodation provider deems “insufficient” to enable it to provide
   accommodation, the accommodation provider cannot use its own failure to
   ask for additional information to deny the accommodation or to
   otherwise subject a person to negative treatment (for example,
   termination of employment, denial of service, etc.).^[234]

   If the person does not agree to provide additional medical information,
   and the accommodation provider can show that this information is
   needed, it may be the case that the person seeking accommodation could
   be found to not have taken part in the accommodation process and the
   accommodation provider would likely be relieved of further
   responsibility.^[235]

   In some cases, there may be conflicting information provided by two
   medical experts. For example, a person’s own doctor or specialist may
   outline different accommodation needs than an independent medical
   examiner’s report. Deciding which report to follow will depend on the
   facts of the particular situation and certain factors, such as which
   expert has more relevant experience, the degree of interaction with the
   person, and the methods used for the assessment(s), among others.^[236]

8.8 Confidentiality

   Documentation supporting the need for a particular accommodation should
   be provided only to the people who need to be aware of the information.
   For example, in employment, it may be preferable in some circumstances
   for information to be provided to the company's health department or
   human resources staff rather than directly to a supervisor, to further
   protect confidentiality.

     Example: A woman with the beginning stages of multiple sclerosis
     provides medical documentation to her human resources department and
     asks for accommodation. The human resources department agrees to
     help facilitate a flexible schedule, rest periods to manage periods
     of fatigue, and time off to attend medical appointments. It may not
     be necessary for the woman to discuss her medical situation in
     detail with anyone else (e.g. her manager or supervisor) since the
     HR department has the required information to ensure that she has
     the accommodations she needs to remain productive at work.

   A person’s medical information should be kept separately from their
   personnel file, or any file associated with their tenancy or use of a
   service.

   In cases where there are compelling circumstances affecting the health
   and safety of an individual, it may be necessary to disclose
   information about a person’s health to others. This should be done in
   accordance with privacy laws. More information about privacy laws and
   how they apply to public and private housing providers, employers and
   service providers can be found at the Office of the Information and
   Privacy Commissioner of Ontario and the Office of the Privacy
   Commissioner of Canada.^[237]
     __________________________________________________________________

   ^[120] Hydro-Québec v. Syndicat des employé-e-s de techniques
   professionnelles et de bureau d'Hydro-Québec, section locale
   2000 (SCFP-FTQ), 2008 SCC 43 (CanLII) [Hydro-Québec] at paras. 14 and
   16.

   ^[121] CRPD, supra note 6 at Article 13(1), Article 24(2)(c), and
   Article 27(1)(i), respectively. “Reasonable accommodation” is covered
   under Article 5 generally.

   ^[122] See Meiorin, supra note 66 at paras. 65-66 and British Columbia
   (Superintendent of Motor Vehicles)
   v. British Columbia (Council of Human Rights), 1999 CanLII 646, [1999]
   3 S.C.R. 868, at paras. 22 and 42-45 [Grismer]. In Gourley v. Hamilton
   Health Sciences 2010 HRTO 2168 (CanLII) [Gourley], the adjudicator
   stated (at para. 8): “The substantive component of the analysis
   considers the reasonableness of the accommodation offered or the
   respondent's reasons for not providing accommodation. It is the
   respondent who bears the onus of demonstrating what considerations,
   assessments, and steps were undertaken to accommodate the employee to
   the point of undue hardship…” See also Lee v. Kawartha Pine Ridge
   District School Board, 2014 HRTO 1212 (CanLII) [Lee] ; McCarthy v.
   Caesar’s Plumbing and Heating Ltd., 2014 HRTO 1795; Philomen v. Jessar
   Eglinton Ltd. (c.o.b. Aaron’s Sales and Lease to Ownership), 2014 HRTO
   1794.

   ^[123] ADGA, supra note 6 at para. 107.

   ^[124] In Lane, supra note 6, the HRTO held at para. 150 that a failure
   to meet the procedural dimensions
   of the duty to accommodate is a form of discrimination in itself
   because it “denies the affected person
   the benefit of what the law requires: a recognition of the obligation
   not to discriminate and to act in such
   a way as to ensure that discrimination does not take place.” The HRTO’s
   decision was confirmed on appeal: ADGA, supra note 6. See
   also Lee, supra note 122.

   ^[125] Gaisiner v. Method Integration Inc., 2014 HRTO 1718 (CanLII)
   [Gaisiner] at para. 149.

   ^[126] Redmond, supra note 50.

   ^[127] From the Preamble (h) to the CRPD, supra note 6.

   ^[128] In Eaton v. Brant County Board of Education, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 241
   [Eaton], the Supreme Court
   of Canada recognized the unique nature of disability and emphasized the
   need for individualized accommodation because the ground of disability
   “means vastly different things depending upon the individual and the
   context” (at para. 69).

   ^[129] McGill University Health Centre (Montreal General Hospital) v.
   Syndicat des employés de l'Hôpital général de Montréal, 2007 SCC 4
   (CanLII), [2007] 1 SCR 161, 2007 [McGill]. Along the same lines, the
   HRTO found that an employment policy that mandates a set return to work
   plan for people with disabilities may be discriminatory if the
   particular circumstances of a person making an accommodation request
   are not considered: Duliunas, supra note 44.

   ^[130] In Eaton, supra note 128, the Supreme Court of Canada stated
   that “integration should be recognized as the norm of general
   application because of the benefits it generally provides” (at para.
   69). However, the Court found that in Emily Eaton’s circumstances,
   segregated accommodation was in her best interests. The Court was of
   the view that this was one of those unusual cases where segregation was
   a more appropriate accommodation.

   ^[131] The CRPD, supra note 6 states at Article 2, “‛Universal design’
   means the design of products, environments, programmes and services to
   be usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without the
   need for adaptation or specialized design. ‘Universal design’ shall not
   exclude assistive devices for particular groups of persons with
   disabilities where this is needed.”

   ^[132] Eldridge, supra note 1 para. 78.

   ^[133] LCO “Framework,” supra note 35 at 79.

   ^[134] Eaton, supra note 128 at para. 67.

   ^[135] Meiorin, supra note 66 at para. 68.

   ^[136] Ibid.

   ^[137] Letter from former Chief Commissioner Barbara Hall to Navanethem
   Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights, regarding the United
   Nations’ study on participation of persons with disabilities in
   political and public life (October 2011).
   Online: www.ohrc.on.ca/en/re-ohchr-thematic-study-participation-persons
   -disabilities-political-and-public-life

   ^[138] Under section 13.1 (1) of Ontario’s Election Act, the returning
   officer shall ensure that each polling place is accessible to electors
   with disabilities. Election Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.6,
   online: www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/90e06. In Hughes v. Elections
   Canada, 2010 CHRT 4 (CanLII), the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal found
   in favour of a voter with a disability who filed a complaint after
   experiencing physical barriers at his polling station.

   ^[139] Elections Ontario, accessible voting,
   online: www.elections.on.ca/en/voting-in-ontario/how--when-and-where-to
   -vote/when-and-where-to-vote/accessible-voting.html.

   ^[140] Count Us In: Removing Barriers to Political Participation –
   Accessible All Candidates Meetings Quick Reference Guide. Ontario
   Government (2007)
   online: www.mcss.gov.on.ca/documents/en/mcss/publications/accessibility
   /Quickreferenceguidetoaccessibleallcandidatesmeetin.pdf. See also,
   letter from former Chief Commissioner Barbara Hall to the Executive of
   all political parties registered in Ontario regarding elections
   accessibility (March 2011)
   online: www.ohrc.on.ca/en/elections-accessibility-letter-executive-all-
   political-parties-registered-ontario.

   ^[141] In VIA Rail, supra note 6, the Supreme Court of Canada stated at
   para. 186: “…while human rights principles include an acknowledgment
   that not every barrier can be eliminated, they also include a duty to
   prevent new ones, or at least, not knowingly to perpetuate old ones
   where preventable.” Organizations, including government, should design
   their programs, services and facilities inclusively with the needs of
   people with disabilities in mind. In Jodhan, supra note 69, a case
   decided under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the Federal
   Court of Appeal found that inaccessible federal government websites
   violated the equality rights of a woman with a vision disability.

   ^[142] See
   http://universaldesign.ie/What-is-Universal-Design/The-7-Principles/

   ^[143] AODA, supra note 6.

   ^[144] The Ontario Building Code Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 23 governs
   the construction of new buildings and the renovation and maintenance of
   existing buildings.

   ^[145] Similarly, organizations cannot rely only on the requirements of
   the Ontario Building Code, but must consider their obligations under
   the Human Rights Code. The Human Rights Code prevails over the Building
   Code and organizations may be vulnerable to a human rights claim if
   their premises fall short of the requirements of the Human Rights Code.
   Relying on relevant building codes has been clearly rejected as a
   defence to a complaint of discrimination under the Human Rights Code:
   see, for example, Quesnel v. London Educational Health Centre (1995),
   28 C.H.R.R. D/474 [Quesnel] .

   ^[146] Information taken from a written submission made to the OHRC by
   the Advocacy Centre for the Elderly (April 2015).

   ^[147] A large number of people become hard of hearing as they age. In
   a written submission to the OHRC in April 2015, the Canadian Hard of
   Hearing Association stated, “Forty percent of Canadians over the age of
   50 are hard of hearing. With an aging Baby Boomer population, the
   proportion of Canadians with hearing loss will increase rapidly over
   the next several decades.”

   ^[148] Quesnel , supra note 145 at para. 16.

   ^[149] Graham v. Underground Miata Network, 2013 HRTO 1457 (CanLII) at
   para. 31.

   ^[150] The duty to accommodate does not require an employer to promote
   an employee to a higher-level position he or she would not otherwise
   have been entitled to: Ellis v. General Motors of Canada Ltd., 2011
   HRTO 1453 (CanLII). The duty to accommodate also does not require “an
   employer to place an employee in the position that the employee
   considers ideal…”: Seguin v. Xstrata Nickel, 2012 HRTO 15 (CanLII) at
   para. 11.

   ^[151] Kelly v. University of British Columbia, 2012 BCHRT 32 (CanLII);
   upheld on merits on judicial review
   in University of British Columbia v. Kelly, 2015 BCSC 1731 (CanLII).

   ^[152] Duliunas, supra note 44. Along the same lines,
   see Ilevbare, supra note 44, in which the HRTO states at para. 52: “The
   termination of a disabled employee’s employment, in the midst of a
   medical leave of absence, is prima facie discriminatory and likewise
   demands an explanation.” This suggests that prima facie discrimination
   will be found where an employee is terminated while on medical leave,
   and the onus will be on the employer to provide a non-discriminatory
   reason for the termination.

   ^[153] Grismer, supra note 122; Cameron v. Nel-gor Nursing Home (1984),
   5 C.H.R.R. D/2170 at D/2192 (Ont. Bd. of Inq.). See also Crabtree v.
   671632 Ontario Ltd. (c.o.b. Econoprint (Stoney Creek), [1996]
   O.H.R.B.I.D. No. 37 (QL) (Ont. Bd. Inq.); Gaisiner , supra note 125.

   ^[154] Gaisiner , ibid.

   ^[155] Pourasadi v. Bentley Leathers Inc., 2015 HRTO 138 (interim
   decision) (CanLII) [Pourasadi]; Brown v. Children's Aid Society of
   Toronto, 2012 HRTO 1025 (CanLII) [Brown]; Briffa v. Costco Wholesale
   Canada Ltd. 2012 HRTO 1970 (CanLII) [Briffa]; Yeats v. Commissionaires
   Great Lakes, 2010 HRTO 906 (CanLII) [Yeats]; Perron v. Revera Long Term
   Care Inc., 2014 HRTO 766 (CanLII) [Perron].

   ^[156] Yeats, ibid.; Briffa, ibid.; Perron, ibid.

   ^[157] Arumugam v. Venture Industrial Supplies Inc. (No. 5), (2013),
   CHRR Doc. 13-2276, 2013 HRTO 1776. See also: Hydro-Québec, supra note
   120; Briffa, ibid.; Yeats, ibid.; and Brown, supra note 155.
   Ultimately, an accommodated employee must be able to perform useful and
   productive work for his or her employer: Vanegas v. Liverton Hotels
   International Inc., 2011 HRTO 715 (CanLII) [Vanegas] .

   ^[158] See, for example, Metsala v. Falconbridge, (2001), 39 C.H.R.R.
   D/153 (Ont. Bd. Inq.) [Metsala] ; ADGA, supra note 6 at para.
   107; Hamilton-Wentworth District School Board v. Fair, 2016 ONCA 421
   (CanLII) [Fair]; MacLeod v. Lambton (County), 2014 HRTO 1330 (CanLII)
   [MacLeod]; Lee, supra note 122. In Ontario Liquor Board Employees’
   Union v. Ontario (Liquor Control Board of Ontario) (Di Caro), 2005
   CanLII 55204 [DiCaro] , the arbitrator stated “…the duty to accommodate
   has evolved and expanded to such an extent that today the law requires
   an employer to look far beyond the disabled employee’s own position as
   a means of accommodation.”

   ^[159] In Hodkin v. SCM Supply Chain Management Inc., 2013 HRTO 923
   (CanLII) [Hodkin] , it was stated at para. 52: “The accommodation
   process requires communication and collaboration between the employer
   and the employee in order to conduct an exhaustive search for positions
   or tasks that match what the applicant is capable of doing despite his
   restrictions.”

   ^[160] This is consistent with the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision
   in Hydro-Québec, supra note 120.

   ^[161] See Carter v. Chrysler Canada Inc., 2014 HRTO 845 (CanLII)
   [Carter]; MacLeod, supra note 158 at para. 219; Vanegas, supra note
   157; DiCaro, supra note 158; Ontario Liquor Control Boards Employees’
   Union v Ontario (Liquor Control Board of Ontario) (Sanfilippo), 2005
   CanLII 55184 [Sanfilippo].

   ^[162] See Ontario Public Service Employees Union v. Ontario (Ministry
   of Community and Correctional Services) (Hyland Grievance), [2014]
   O.G.S.B.A. No. 1.

   ^[163] Note that in Ramasawaksingh v. Brampton (City), 2015 HRTO 1047
   (interim decision) (CanLII), the HRTO stated at para. 9: “[T]he fact
   that a new position attracts a lesser rate of pay [than the pre-injury
   job] is not discriminatory.” The HRTO stated its agreement with and
   adopted the reasoning of Nearing v. Toronto (City), 2010 HRTO 1351
   (CanLII) and Koroli v. Automodule Corp, 2011 HRTO 774 (CanLII), both of
   which refer to the Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in Ontario
   Nurses’ Association v. Orillia Soldiers’ Memorial Hospital, [1999]
   CanLII 3687 (ON CA).

   ^[164] In Chamberlin v. 599273 Ontario Ltd cob Stirling Honda (1989),
   11 C.H.R.R. D/110 (Ont. Bd. of Inq.), the Board of Inquiry found that
   the employer should have given the complainant the opportunity to prove
   he could still perform his old job.

   ^[165] Employers should also be aware of their responsibility to
   provide suitable work to satisfy the obligation to re-employ workers
   who sustain a work-related injury: see the WSIA, supra note 29, ss. 40
   and 41.

   ^[166] See, for example, Re Community Lifecare Inc. and Ontario
   Nurses’ Association, (2011), 101 L.A.C. 4^th 87, in which an arbitrator
   found that an employer had failed to accommodate an employee who had
   developed a bad back when it failed to consider what modified light
   duty work it might be able to provide on a permanent basis.

   ^[167] Metsala, supra note 158. The HRTO has identified several “best
   practices” related to this process. For example, in at least two cases
   the HRTO commented favourably on an employer’s practice of canvassing
   vacant positions that match an employee’s disability-related needs and
   qualifications and then “holding” or “‘protecting” those positions to
   make sure that they are not first filled by someone who does not
   require accommodation: see Harnden v. The Ottawa Hospital, 2011 HRTO
   1258 (CanLII) and Gourley, supra note 122. Other cases have confirmed
   that direct placement in an alternative position, without being
   required to succeed in a job competition, may be
   required: Fair, supra note 158. See also MacLeod, supra note 158. For
   possible exceptions in specific circumstances, see: Buttar v. Halton
   Regional Police Services Board, 2013 HRTO 1578 (CanLII) [Buttar]
   and Formosa, supra note 12.

   ^[168] Hydro-Québec, supra note 120 at para. 15.

   ^[169] Gahagan v. James Campbell Inc., 2014 HRTO 14 (CanLII) at para.
   27 [recon dismissed 2014 HRTO 339]; see also, Saucier v. Smart
   Lazer Grafix, 2009 HRTO 1053 (CanLII).

   ^[170] The Code does not require an employer to schedule a second
   employee during time that an employee would normally be working alone
   where there is a need to perform duties that the employee is incapable
   of performing due to a disability: Pourasadi , supra note
   155; Perron, supra note 155; Lee, supra note 122; Re Hamilton Health
   Sciences and ONA (Pringle), 2013 CarswellOnt 8640, 115 C.L.A.S. 97, 232
   L.A.C. (4^th) 334; Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local No. 1487
   v. Scarborough Hospital, [2009] O.L.A.A. No. 650.

   ^[171] Vanegas, supra note 157.

   ^[172] Fair, supra note 158. Employers should also be aware of the
   rights and obligations pertaining to return to work set out by
   Ontario’s Workplace Safety and Insurance Board that exist concurrently
   with human rights protections: see

   www.wsib.on.ca/WSIBPortal/faces/WSIBManualPage?cGUID=19-02-02&rDef=WSIB
   _RD_OPM&fGUID=835502100635000524&_afrLoop=1033712479352182&_afrWindowMo
   de=0&_afrWindowId=gnnbsv3wk_14#%40%3FcGUID%3D19-02-02%26_afrWindowId%3D
   gnnbsv3wk_14%26_afrLoop%3D1033712479352182%26rDef%3DWSIB_RD_OPM%26_afrW
   indowMode%3D0%26fGUID%3D835502100635000524%26_adf.ctrl-state%3Dgnnbsv3w
   k_38

   ^[173] See also section 29 of Regulation 191/11, Integrated
   Accessibility Standards, under the AODA, supra note 6 which requires
   employers (other than employers in private/not-for-profit organizations
   with fewer than 50 employees) to establish a documented process for
   supporting employees who return to work after being away for
   disability-related reasons and require accommodation.

   ^[174] Tombs v. 1303939 Ontario Ltd. (c.o.b. Holiday Inn Express), 2015
   HRTO 842 (CanLII).

   ^[175] See Section 17 of the Code, supra note 7.

   ^[176] A policy that mandates a set return-to-work plan for people with
   disabilities may be discriminatory if the particular circumstances of a
   person making an accommodation request are not
   considered: Duliunas, supra note 44.

   ^[177] See Darvish-Ghaderi, supra note 12 in which the HRTO (at para.
   37) cited Hydro-Québec, supra note 120 and found that since a woman was
   permanently unfit to return to work, she was “no longer able to fulfill
   the basic obligations associated with her employment relationship for
   the foreseeable future” and for that reason the employer’s duty to
   accommodate had come to an end. The HRTO went on to state at para. 36
   that “to continue [the woman] in employment in these circumstances
   would have resulted in undue hardship.”

   ^[178] Carter, supra note 161 at para. 145, citing McGill, supra note
   129.

   ^[179] The test for undue hardship is set out fully in section 9 of
   this Policy.

   ^[180] Meiorin, supra note 66 at para. 54.

   ^[181] See Hydro-Québec, supra note 120 for the Supreme Court of
   Canada’s comments on what the third part of this test means, in a
   practical sense, in the context of a disability accommodation in the
   workplace.

   ^[182] Grismer, supra note 122 at para. 20.

   ^[183] Meiorin, supra note 66 at para. 65.

   ^[184] The duty to accommodate may require employers and others to
   consider modifying performance standards or productivity
   targets: Meiorin, supra note 66 at para. 65. The term “performance
   standard” refers broadly to qualitative or quantitative standards that
   may be imposed on some or all aspects of work, whether they are set by
   the employer or through collective bargaining. A productivity target is
   a performance standard that relates specifically to the output of work
   expected by the employer. Performance standards generally can be
   distinguished from qualification standards, which are the skills
   or attributes that one must have to be eligible for a particular job:

     Production standards identify the level at which an employee must
     perform job functions in order to perform successfully.
     Qualification standards, on the other hand, identify the skills and
     abilities necessary to perform the functions at the required level.

   (Robert L. Burgdorf, Disability Discrimination in Employment
   Law (Washington D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs, 1995) at 241.)

   The central issue in determining whether or how performance standards
   should be modified is whether the standards in question are essential
   duties or requirements within the meaning of section 17 of the Code. If
   the person is unable to perform the standard, but the standard is not
   considered an essential part of the job, it can be changed or the
   function removed from the employee altogether and reassigned. If the
   standard is essential, the employer is nevertheless required to
   accommodate the employee under section 17(2) of the Code. Keeping in
   mind the overall objective of the inclusion of employees with
   disabilities in the workplace, sections 17(1) and (2) of
   the Code together include an obligation on an employer to accommodate a
   person. This does not preclude the employer from enforcing performance
   standards that are unrelated to the disability. The employer is
   entitled to a productive employee and to develop standards and targets
   that maximize organizational objectives. Organizations should be guided
   by objective evidence when developing or assessing qualification
   standards that they consider are essential duties or requirements. If
   an employer is considering a standard that will be widely adopted, it
   should consider the job duties of employees in different settings that
   are or would be subject to the standard and whether there is a link
   between the standard and the duties of employees: Lauzon v. Ontario
   Provincial Police, 2011 HRTO 1404 (CanLII).

   ^[185] According to Statistics Canada, the most needed accommodation
   for people with disabilities in
   the Canadian workplace is modified/reduced hours. And while this is the
   need most commonly met
   by employers, modified/reduced hours is also “the reason most
   frequently cited for difficulty advancing
   in employment”: Matthew Till, et al., (2015). Canadian Survey on
   Disability, 2012: A Profile of the Labour Market Experiences of Adults
   with Disabilities among Canadians aged 15 years and older, 2012,
   Statistics Canada, 2015, at 12 and 17, available online
   at: www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-654-x/89-654-x2015005-eng.htm.

   ^[186] Hodkin, supra note 159.

   ^[187] See Vanegas, supra note 157; DiCaro, supra note
   158; Sanfilippo, supra note 161.

   ^[188] See section 8.3.2 of this Policy on “Employment-specific
   accommodation issues” for more information on alternative work.

   ^[189] Allen v. Ottawa (City), 2011 HRTO 344 (CanLII) and Kelly v.
   CultureLink Settlement Services, 2010 HRTO 977 (CanLII). Note that
   delays must be shown to be related to a disability and must be made in
   good faith: see Arcuri v. Cambridge Memorial Hospital, 2010 HRTO 578
   (CanLII); Vallen v. Ford Motor Company of Canada, 2012 HRTO 932
   (CanLII) and M.C. v. London School of Business, 2015 HRTO 635 (CanLII).
   Note also that in relation to adjudicators or in the context of
   administrative tribunals, the “Doctrine of Judicial Immunity” may apply
   to protect adjudicators who are alleged to have not provided
   accommodation in the exercise of their decision-making and dispute
   resolution functions: see Thomson v. Ontario Secondary School Teachers’
   Federation, 2011 HRTO 116 (CanLII); Hazel v. Ainsworth Engineered, 2009
   HRTO 2180 (CanLII); McWilliams v. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board,
   2010 HRTO 937 (CanLII).

   ^[190] See Smolak, supra note 12; Hill v. Bani-Ahmad, 2014 HRTO 937
   (CanLII); Bourdeau v. Kingston Bazar, 2012 HRTO 393 (CanLII).

   ^[191] People with disabilities who use service animals to assist them
   with disability-related needs (such as anxiety) are also protected
   under the definition of “disability” in section 10 of the Code. Service
   animals do not have to be trained or certified by a recognized
   disability-related organization. However, where it is not immediately
   obvious that the animal is performing a disability-related service, a
   person must be able to show evidence (such as a letter from a doctor or
   other qualified medical professional) that they have a disability and
   that the animal assists with their disability-related needs. Service
   providers and others who receive such documentation should not use
   their own assumptions and observations to second-guess this
   verification. See Allarie v. Rouble, 2010 HRTO 61 (CanLII); Sweet v.
   1790907 Ontario Inc. o/a Kanda Sushi, 2015 HRTO 433
   (CanLII); Sprague v. RioCan Empress Walk Inc., 2015 HRTO 942
   (CanLII); Schussler v. 1709043 Ontario, 2009 HRTO 2194 (CanLII); Kamis
   v. 1903397 Ontario Inc., 2015 HRTO 741 (CanLII). Section 4 of
   Regulation 429/07 under the AODA, supra note 6, also requires
   organizations to permit a person with a disability to be accompanied by
   their guide dog or service animal on all premises that are normally
   open to the public or third parties, unless the animal is otherwise
   excluded by law from the premises.

   ^[192] For example, some disabilities may result in “acting out”
   behaviours. Education providers and other responsible organizations
   need to take into account whether behaviours that would otherwise
   warrant discipline are related to a disability.

   ^[193] This might apply where a person with a disability does not have
   a rental or credit history to provide to a prospective landlord because
   they have previously only lived as a dependent.

   ^[194] Supra, note 192.

   ^[195] Dixon, supra note 38; Devoe, supra note 12.

   ^[196] See section 8.8 of this Policy on “Confidentiality” for more
   information.

   ^[197] In Lane, supra note 6, a case involving an employee with a
   mental health disability, the HRTO stated at para. 144: “The procedural
   dimensions of the duty to accommodate required those responsible to
   engage in a fuller exploration of the nature of bipolar disorder and to
   form a better informed prognosis of the likely impact of his condition
   in the workplace.”

   ^[198] See Dawson, supra note 33 at paras. 243-245.

   ^[199] See section 8.6.1 of this Policy on “Duty to inquire about
   accommodation needs” for information on when an organization is
   expected to inquire about accommodation needs, even when a person may
   not have made a specific request.

   ^[200] In Baber, supra note 12, the HRTO found that even if the duty to
   accommodate was triggered,
   the employer had fulfilled its duty to accommodate because Ms. Baber
   failed to co-operate in the accommodation process by refusing
   reasonable requests for information that would confirm her needs. She
   consistently refused to provide the necessary medical information. The
   HRTO found that the employer did not breach its duty to accommodate her
   when it terminated her employment.

   ^[201] Supra note 184.

   ^[202] Supra note 199.

   ^[203] Meiorin, supra note 66 at paras. 65-66.

   ^[204] Conte v. Rogers Cablesystems Ltd., (1999) 36 C.H.R.R. D/403
   (C.H.R.T.); Mazuelos v. Clark (2000) C.H.R.R. Doc. 00-011
   (B.C.H.R.T.); Lane, supra note 6; Krieger, supra note
   12; Hodkin, supra note 159; MacLeod, supra note 158.

   ^[205] Hodkin, ibid.

   ^[206] In Turnbull, supra note 38, the Board of Inquiry upheld a
   discrimination complaint finding that although Famous Players had taken
   steps to comply with the Code by providing equal access to its movie
   theatres for people with disabilities, it had not done so quickly
   enough, and had failed to act with “due diligence and dispatch” (para.
   216).

   ^[207] Human rights decision-makers have not been consistent on the
   issue of who is responsible for the costs of accommodation (or what
   types of expenses are included in “the costs of accommodation”).
   See Iley v. Sault Ste. Marie Community Information and Career Centre,
   2010 HRTO 1773 (CanLII) in which the HRTO ordered the applicant to
   obtain medical information and stated: “The respondents are… directed
   to reimburse the applicant for the costs of such a production, since it
   is being done at their request.” But also see Drost v. Ottawa-Carleton
   District School Board, 2012 HRTO 235 (CanLII) where, in the context of
   a hearing in which the parties are subject to the HRTO’s rules that
   require that they disclose all arguably relevant documents, the HRTO
   placed the onus of covering the costs of medical information for both
   establishing a disability and outlining the accommodation needs on the
   applicant. It is the OHRC’s position that the procedural component of
   the duty to accommodate – which includes obtaining all relevant
   information and considering how to accommodate – includes a
   responsibility to pay the costs necessary to facilitate accommodation,
   such as medical assessments and doctor’s reports, unless to do so would
   cause undue hardship. This position is consistent with the human rights
   principle that the Code be given a broad, purposive and contextual
   interpretation to advance the goal of eliminating discrimination.

   ^[208] Central Okanagan School Dist. No. 23 v. Renaud, [1992] 2 S.C.R.
   970, [Renaud].

   ^[209] In DeSouza, supra note 12, the HRTO found that a tennis club
   discriminated against a tennis instructor based on disability when it
   imposed requirements on the instructor that he tell all private clients
   about his epilepsy and instruct all staff on how to deal with a
   seizure.

   ^[210] Puleio v. Moneris Solutions, 2011 HRTO 659 (CanLII).

   ^[211] The Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in Renaud, supra note
   208, sets out the obligations of unions. See also Bubb-Clarke v.
   Toronto Transit Commission, 2002 CanLII 46503 (HRTO) [Bubb-Clarke];
   and Carter, supra note 161. See section 9 of this Policy on Undue
   Hardship for more detailed information.

   ^[212] Eldridge, supra note 1.

   ^[213] For example, people with mental health disabilities experiencing
   a first episode of a disability may be unaware that they are
   experiencing impairment. Also, denying the presence of a disability may
   be an aspect of having an addiction. For more information on mental
   health disabilities and addictions, see the OHRC’s Mental Health
   Policy, supra note 9.

   ^[214] See, for example, Lane, supra note 6; ADGA, supra note
   6; Krieger, supra note 12; Mellon v. Canada (Human Resources
   Development), 2006 CHRT 3 (CanLII) [Mellon] at paras.
   97-98; MacLeod, supra note 158.

   ^[215] Sears¸ supra note 118 at para. 114. See also Wall v. The Lippé
   Group, 2008 HRTO 50 (CanLII) [Wall]; Davis v. 1041433 Ontario Ltd. (No.
   2), 2005 HRTO 37 (CanLII), at paras. 67-68.

   ^[216] See, for example, Lane, supra note 6; Krieger, supra note
   12; Mellon, supra note 214; Willems-Wilson v. Allbright Drycleaners
   Ltd. (1997), 32 C.H.R.R. D/71 (B.C.H.R.T.); Zaryski v.
   Loftsgard (1995), 22 C.H.R.R. D/256 (Sask. Bd. Inq.).

   ^[217] See Krieger, ibid. at para. 157; Bowden v. Yellow Cab and others
   (No. 2), 2011 BCHRT 14 (CanLII); Trask v. Nova Scotia (Correctional
   Services) (No. 1) (2010), 70 C.H.R.R. D/21 (N.S. Bd. Inq.); Fleming v.
   North Bay (City), 2010 HRTO 355 (CanLII) [Fleming]; Walton Enterprises
   v. Lombardi, 2013 ONSC 4218 (CanLII) [Walton]; McLean v. Riverside
   Health Care Facilities Inc., 2014 HRTO 1621 (CanLII) at para. 27.

   ^[218] See Fleming and Lombardi, ibid. and Wright v. College and
   Association of Registered Nurses of Alberta (Appeals Committee), 2012
   ABCA 267, leave to appeal refused [2012] S.C.C.A. No. 486.

   ^[219] In Morris v. British Columbia Railway Co. (2003), 46 C.H.R.R.
   D/162, 2003 BCHRT 14 [Morris], a tribunal found that if performance
   problems related to a disability are a reason for the termination, the
   disability is a factor in the termination. Knowing of the claimant’s
   condition, the employer should have considered whether the disability
   was affecting his performance and sought further medical assessment. It
   failed to do so. The case also confirms that an employer can’t “blind
   itself to its observations of an employee's behaviour…All relevant
   factors must be considered by an employer dealing with an employee with
   a disability, including medical evidence, its own observations, and the
   employee's own comments and concerns.” (at para. 238).

   ^[220] Many disabilities continue to be highly stigmatized (e.g. mental
   health disabilities, addictions, HIV and AIDS), and many people may be
   justifiably worried that sharing personal medical information will make
   them vulnerable to discrimination.

   ^[221] Morris, supra note 219; Yeats, supra note 155 at paras. 47-8.

   ^[222] For more information on human rights issues in the job
   recruitment process, see the OHRC’s Policy
   on employment-related medical information, available online
   at: www.ohrc.on.ca/sites/default/files/attachments/Policy_on_employment
   -related_medical_information.pdf.

   ^[223] The Court applied the Code and the OHRC’s 2001 Disability
   Policy and held that it would have been reasonable and appropriate for
   the co-op to obtain answers from the occupant’s doctor to determine if
   any of the volunteer tasks could be performed, notwithstanding her
   medical condition. If so, it could have accommodated her by assigning
   her tasks she could perform, but if not, the cost of accommodating her
   by exempting her from the volunteer work requirement would be unlikely
   to impose an undue hardship. The Court concluded that it would be
   unjust in all the circumstances to evict the
   occupant: Eagleson, supra note 12.

   ^[224] In Providence Care, Mental Health Services v. Ontario Public
   Service Employees Union, Local 431, 2011 CanLII 6863 (ON LA), the
   arbitrator distinguishes the “nature of disability” from a “diagnosis”
   by saying at para. 33: “However, I continue to be of the view that
   nature of illness (or injury) is a general statement of same in plain
   language without an actual diagnosis or other technical medical details
   or symptoms. Diagnosis and nature of illness are not synonymous terms,
   but there is an overlap between them, such that a description of the
   nature of an illness or injury may reveal the diagnosis and in
   others it will not.”

   ^[225] See Duliunas, supra note 44; Devoe, supra note 12;
   and, Eagleson, supra note 12.

   ^[226] See Morris, supra note 219; Russell, supra note 44. But also
   see Oak Bay Marina Ltd. v. British Columbia (Human Rights Tribunal)
   (No. 2) (2002), 43 C.H.R.R. D/487, 2002 BCCA 495 [Oak Bay].

   ^[227] In Simpson v. Commissionaires (Great Lakes), 2009 HRTO 1362
   (CanLII), the HRTO stated at para. 35:

     For the purposes of a request for employment accommodation,
     generally the focus should be on the functional limitations of the
     employee’s condition (capacities and symptoms) and how those
     functional aspects interact with the workplace duties and
     environment. Consequently, an employer need not be informed of the
     specific cause of the employee’s condition or the exact diagnosis in
     order to be put on notice that an employee has disability-related
     needs requiring accommodation.

   Similarly, in Cristiano v. Grand National Apparel Inc., 2012 HRTO 991
   (CanLII), the HRTO stated at para. 20: “There are limits on what a
   respondent can require of its employees claiming a need for a medical
   leave. For example, in most instances, an employer is not entitled to a
   diagnosis. But an employer is entitled to know enough to make some
   assessment of the bona fides of the leave request and sufficient
   information to determine what if any accommodations might be made…” See
   also Wall, supra note 215; Mellon, supra note 214; Leong v. Ontario
   (Attorney General), 2012 HRTO 1685 (CanLII); Noe, supra note
   50; Ilevbare, supra note 44; Jarrold v. Brewers Retail Inc. (c.o.b.
   Beer Store), 2014 HRTO 1070 (CanLII); Easthom v. Dyna-Mig, 2014 HRTO
   1457(CanLII) .

   ^[228] A person may have more rigorous obligations to disclose medical
   information in the context of litigation. In Hicks v.
   Hamilton-Wentworth Catholic District School Board¸ 2015 HRTO 1285
   (CanLII), the HRTO stated at paragraph 17: “Where there is a dispute
   about the medical status of an employee further medical information may
   be required and where, as in these circumstances, there is litigation
   with respect to the dispute the parties will be entitled to much more
   fulsome disclosure of the medical documentation than might be the case
   in other circumstances.” See also Fay v. Independent Living Services,
   2014 HRTO 720(CanLII) .

   ^[229] Where there is a reasonable basis to question the legitimacy of
   a person’s request for accommodation or the adequacy of the information
   provided, an accommodation provider may be entitled to medical
   confirmation that a diagnosis exists, though this would not normally
   include disclosure of a person’s specific diagnosis. Accommodation
   providers should keep in mind that diagnoses for certain disabilities
   can be difficult to get, may change over time and may result in vastly
   different symptoms and experiences for different people. Therefore, a
   general statement that a person has a disability and identifying what a
   person needs in relation to their functional limitations is often more
   helpful to the accommodation process than a diagnosis.
   See Mellon, supra note 214 at para. 99: “An individual with a
   disability…may not know the exact nature and extent of that disability
   at the time they are experiencing the symptoms. In such circumstances,
   we cannot impose a duty to disclose a conclusive medical diagnosis.”
   Some people may present with a set of symptoms, but without a specific
   diagnosis. See Ball, supra note 56.

   ^[230] See Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 831 v. Brampton
   (City) [2008] O.L.A.A. No. 359 [C.U.P.E.].

   ^[231] The Canadian Human Rights Tribunal has found that requests for a
   person with autism to undergo a psychiatric examination after asking
   for a leave of absence because of workplace harassment was in itself a
   form of harassment. It stated, “Indeed, the evidence shows that the
   Respondent remained deaf to the pleas of Ms. Dawson who did not want to
   see a physician whom she did not know and who knew nothing about
   autism, of her union representatives who expressed concern and
   consternation about Ms. Dawson having to submit to a medical
   examination by a Canada Post designated physician, but more
   importantly, of her treating physician who stated that she was very
   concerned that this could provoke a serious emotional reaction from Ms.
   Dawson. …However well-intended Canada Post management was in seeking a
   medical evaluation, the Tribunal finds that, in the present
   circumstances, the general behaviour of those Canada Post employees who
   were involved in the medical evaluation process constitutes
   harassment.” See Dawson, supra note 33 at paras. 216 and 219. For
   arbitration cases that have found that treatment requirements imposed
   by employers interfered with employees’ privacy, see: Central Care
   Corp. v. Christian Labour Assn. of Canada, Local 302 (Courtney
   Grievance), [2011] O.L.A.A. No. 144; Federated Cooperatives Ltd. v.
   General Teamsters, Local 987 (Policy Grievance) (2010), 194 L.A.C.
   (4th) 326; and, Brant Community Healthcare System v. Ontario Nurses’
   Assn. (Medical Form Grievance), [2008] O.L.A.A. No. 116, in which the
   arbitrator stated: “Treatment modalities are a matter for the doctor
   and the patient.”

   ^[232] See, for example, Oak Bay, supra note 226.

   ^[233] In one case, a doctor’s note stating that a woman had a “medical
   condition” was considered insufficient to establish that she had a
   disability as per the meaning of the Code: see Simcoe Condominium
   Corporation No. 89 v. Dominelli, 2015 ONSC 3661 (CanLII) .

   ^[234] Alberta (Human Rights and Citizenship Comm.) v. Federated
   Co-operatives Ltd. (2005), 53 C.H.R.R. D/496, 2005 ABQB
   58; Duliunas, supra note 44 at para. 77, and Pridham, supra note 12.
   See also Liu v. Carleton University, 2015 HRTO 621 (CanLII).

   ^[235] See Baber, supra note 12 and C.U.P.E., supra note 230.

   ^[236] See section 4.9.g) in the OHRC’s publication Human Rights at
   Work for a more detailed description of these factors, available online
   at: www.ohrc.on.ca/en/human-rights-work-2008-third-edition?page=human-C
   ontents.html.

   ^[237] See: www.priv.gc.ca/index_e.asp and www.ipc.on.ca/english/Home-P
   age/. Different privacy laws apply to different organizations – for
   example, private housing providers may be covered by the Personal
   Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA),
   S.C. 2000, c. 5, and are only permitted to disclose personal health
   information under certain circumstances (see Section 7(3)).

Book Prev / Next Navigation

   Previous
   Next
   Tweet

OHRC Footer Icons

   Graphic. Ontario coat of arms

OHRC Footer Menu

     * About the Commission
     * Business Plans
     * Annual Reports
     * News Centre
     * Contact us
     * Expense Disclosure
     * Accessibility
     * Feedback
     * Privacy Statement
     * © King’s Printer for Ontario
     * Open Data
