   20th World Congress of Philosophy Logo

   [1]Political Philosophy

   Democracy and Political Obligation

   Herman van Erp
   Tilburg University
   [2]H.H.H.vErp@kub.nl

   bluered.gif (1041 bytes)

     ABSTRACT: The public life of political servants is characterized by
     other duties and obligations than private life. Conflicts can even
     arise between a person's public and private duties. The central
     point of this paper is to examine whether this difference of duties
     can be regarded as an effect of different forms of obligation. Can
     we speak of a particular form of political obligation in the same
     way in which Kant distinguishes between ethical and legal
     obligation, the former pertaining to intentions and the latter to
     external aspects of the action? Could political obligation be
     distinguished from both of them, for example by its relation towards
     ends? The first section develops the thesis that if there is such a
     thing as political necessity, it must be some kind of moral
     obligation. The second section focuses on the question of whether
     political obligation can be conceived of as different from legal and
     ethical obligation, the only two forms of moral obligation that Kant
     distinguishes. The last section is about a differentiated conception
     of political obligation and virtue, in democracies, for political
     leaders, for citizens, and for public servants.

                          bluered.gif (1041 bytes)

   All modern societies in some way accept the distinction between legal
   and ethical obligation. The former constitutes an exterior sphere of
   norms and rules, including duties which citizens can be compelled to
   perform by the threat of punishment or other legal consequences, the
   latter concerns the interior sphere of a person's conscience and
   private intentions. Making this distinction can be seen as the explicit
   acknowledgement of what Agnes Heller has called 'the first structural
   change in morals': the evolution of a separate subjective sphere of
   morality within the public ethical life. (1) Legal and moral law oblige
   in different ways and also contain different duties. In modern society,
   legal duties usually take the form of commands and rules. The
   distinguishing characteristic of legal duties and corresponding rights
   is that they can be enforced by an appeal to the law. For the sake of
   certainty and to avoid arbitrariness, the legal system strives to
   formulate duties as unambiguously, completely and consistently as
   possible, and to determine the rules for their enforcement precisely.
   Thus, the question of what a legal obligation is and how the subjects
   under obligation must behave is virtually answered by the legal system
   itself. How to fulfill a moral duty, on the other hand, is considered a
   matter of ethical obligation and left to the conscience of private
   persons. Immanuel Kant thought that the domain of duties could be
   adequately divided into duties that can be the object of legal
   obligation, on the one hand, and duties that only can be the object of
   ethical obligation, on the other. The latter pertains to intentions;
   the former, to external aspects of the action. I think, however, that
   there are good reasons for also distinguishing a domain of political
   obligation that is not reducible to either legal or ethical obligation.
   Political obligation must be distinguished from both of the former
   categories because it allows, in exceptional circumstances, illegal
   means in order to safeguard political ends. This political violence
   cannot simply be legitimized by the principle that urgent need goes
   before the law, but must be based on a more positive principle. I think
   the same principle lies at the base of the legitimation of democratic
   or republican revolutions. In the first section of this article, the
   thesis is developed that if there is such a thing as political
   necessity, it must be some form of moral obligation. In the second, the
   concept of political obligation is clarified as being different from
   ethical and legal obligation. In the third, a connection is made
   between political obligation and democratic political virtue.

   1. Moral duty and political necessity

   Machiavelli is the most famous political theorist to argue that, in the
   field of political action, there is something like a political
   necessity that can override moral norms or obligations. From a moral
   point of view, it is not acceptable to legitimize immoral politics. But
   is this Machiavelli's intention? The possible immoral actions of the
   prince, such as murder of his political opponents, cruelty against his
   subjects, violation of treaties, are neither approved nor excused by
   Machiavelli. The question whether a politician has to act in a way that
   is not in accordance with moral norms is always set in the special
   context of historical examples in his works. No general legitimation or
   permission for immoral actions is given. There seems only to be a form
   of inevitability under special circumstances. In the large majority of
   cases of immoral behaviour mentioned by Machiavelli, however, this
   inevitability appears to be the result of wrong calculations. We could
   suppose that, even in Machiavelli's view, the inevitability of an
   immoral action can never be known as a real necessity. So-called
   political necessity is itself always a concept used within the strategy
   of the political power game. There is no objective necessity that, as
   an external constraint, forces the politician to act immorally, nor is
   there any rule or knowledge that would commit him to such an action.
   This seems logical because, if there really were an objective necessity
   under special circumstances to kill someone or to commit any other
   crime, or if a statesman with a sense of responsibility knew himself to
   be obliged to commit such actions, these actions could not be
   considered in any sense immoral. If the concept of political necessity
   can have a legitimation function for actions that seem to be morally
   reprehensible, this concept must be linked to a concept of political
   responsibility and obligation.

   Such renowned moral philosophers as Michael Walzer and, though more
   hesitantly, Thomas Nagel and Bernard Williams, seem to accept that
   political necessity can cause the paradox that responsible politicians
   must get their hands dirty and commit moral crimes. (2) From a Kantian
   moral point of view, there can be no other necessity for free human
   actions than moral necessity. If this is the right conception, as I
   believe it is, we cannot justly speak of moral paradoxes. The evil that
   necessarily would have to be done cannot be morally wrong, because it
   would be the object of a political obligation. On this point, I must
   agree with Nielsen's criticism of the ideas of the previously mentioned
   authors, with respect to the dirty hands dilemma. (3) But I cannot
   agree with the background of his ethical theory, which is an example of
   a consequentialism that must lead to the principle that in politics the
   ends sanctify the means.

   The difference between private and public morality is not a question of
   different principles, but a question of their application under
   different circumstances. Political circumstances generally make it
   impossible or irresponsible to solely appeal to one's good intentions
   while remaining passive and inert. In politics, there is always some
   urgency for action or decision and politics, therefore, needs a concept
   of particular ends by which its actions and decisions can be
   legitimized. Political necessities are causal factors in the
   realisation of these ends. The concept of necessity belongs to the
   interpretative definition of the circumstances under which positive
   moral principles and values have to be applied. But political
   necessities cannot remove the strict necessity of categorical moral
   prohibitions. Political leaders have an obligation to translate the
   concept of a political community into concrete political ends and the
   means for their realisation. As causal factors between means and ends,
   political necessities are themselves part of these translations.
   Precisely because politicians have to think in these categories of
   political ends, means and necessities, they are exposed to the risk of
   considering moral constraints as only one of the impediments to their
   possible actions. The concept of political necessity involves the
   inclination of transgressing moral limits as if this transgression was
   the clearing away of an obstacle. Therefore, Thomas Nagel is right when
   he states: 'One of the hardest lines to draw in public policy is the
   one that defines where the ends stop justifying the means. If results
   were the only basis for public morality then it would be possible to
   justify anything, including torture and massacre, in the service of
   sufficiently large interests.' (4) It is the political body as a whole,
   the democratic society, that has to draw and safeguard this line.

   2. The character of political obligation

   Morality puts particular limits on actions that may not be
   transgressed, even for the most desirable public ends. Nevertheless, in
   the domain of the morality of public life, it seems more important to
   take responsibility for the realisation of ends than in private life,
   the morality of which is mainly characterised by feelings and
   intentions. The limits placed on the actions of private individuals are
   more stringent than those put on the actions of representatives of the
   state. Private persons are prohibited from encroaching on the rights of
   others for the sake of their own well-being. The state, on the other
   hand, sometimes has a right to encroach on private life and the rights
   of one individual for the benefit of others or because of its own
   interests. Its servants may even use ruthless means that would be
   unacceptable in private life. Although the ultimate criteria for what
   is morally good and wrong are the same for both public and private life
   and these domains are not governed by different moral principles, the
   public life of political servants is characterised by other duties than
   those of the individual in private life. There can even be particular
   conflicts between a person's public and private duties. Can this
   difference of duties be regarded as an effect of different forms of
   obligation?

   There is an analytical connection between duty and obligation.
   Obligation often has the same meaning as duty. To be obliged means to
   have a duty. An obligation can also be the act of obliging oneself or
   someone else. In that case, a duty is the conception of some behaviour
   as the object of an obligation. Generally, we can say that people are
   obliged to perform their duty. Determining the grounds on which this
   general obligation is founded ultimately is a difficult philosophical
   question. But is seems clear that there cannot be an obligation without
   a will imposing a duty or an obliging will. The person or entity that
   imposes an obligation is called the author and the obliged person is
   the subject of the obligation. From the point of view of their origins,
   we can distinguish between different forms of obligation. One can
   oblige oneself, so that the same person is both the subject and the
   author of the obligation in the form of an autonomous moral will. In
   the case of legal obligation, which can be enforced by an external
   authority, we are obliged by the will of another person: the lawgiver
   as the author of the obligation. To the extent that a moral duty cannot
   be enforced by an external authority, the moral necessity has the
   character of an ethical obligation. A moral duty, therefore, can be the
   object of either legal or ethical obligation.

   Many political theories consider political obligation to be the
   obligation of citizens to obey the laws and commands of the state. (5)
   Under normal circumstances, all citizens ought to behave in conformity
   with their conscientious interpretation of the law. This obligation to
   obey can be understood as a moral duty, the explanation of which does
   not need a special conception of political obligation, as distinct from
   legal or ethical obligation. This seems true as long as the state does
   not ask of its citizens an extraordinary readiness to make sacrifices
   or to take special responsibilities. But political obligation is also
   associated with a duty to defend your country, to fight for justice
   and, particularly in war, even to risk your own life. These duties
   cannot always be seen as supererogatory, because under particular
   circumstances citizens and politicians are forced to behave in
   conformity with these requirements. Political necessity is a form of
   external coercion and, therefore, different from moral necessity, but
   it is also different from legal enforcement.

   It seems possible and relevant to make a distinction between the
   citizens' ethical and legal obligation to obey the laws of a political
   system, on the one hand, and political obligation in a stricter and
   particular sense, on the other. In the domain of political action,
   there seems to be a need for obligations that cannot be left to the
   interior sphere of the conscience of private persons, nor reduced to
   legal enforcement. An obvious reason is the problem that, outside an
   existing legitimized political system, there is no legal right to
   enforce laws. In those situations, too, it must be possible to
   establish, eventually by force, a system of law and political order.
   Traditionally, the right to impose a political order and to subject
   people to a positive law is legitimized by mythical and religious
   representations, or by an appeal to natural right. Kant deduces
   political obligation totally from the concept of law. He thinks that we
   can make a 'construction' of the concept of right by imagining a system
   of continuous reciprocal constraint which upholds the freedom of all in
   accordance with general laws. (6) But the concept of legal enforcement
   provides only a formal determination of public law. It does not say
   anything about who has a right to enforce which laws with respect to
   which ends. We can imagine numerous systems of rules that could be
   externally enforced in a general way. Therefore, the concept of legal
   obligation alone can neither protect society against political
   disagreement, despotism and totalitarianism, nor provide a more
   substantial conception of public interest. There is a necessity to
   create political structures that both allow for normative social
   decisions and protect the freedom of citizens, a necessity that cannot
   be conceived of as a system of totally external enforcement. The
   solution to this problem, of how to establish a legitimized political
   order, may not be left to the private moral will of the political
   leaders. The creation or reconstruction of a just political system is
   an obligation that also cannot be enforced legally. Nevertheless, it
   seems to allow for some other kind of enforcement, which is called the
   will of the people, that even can take the form of rebellion and
   violence. But the will of the people as such, without democratic
   political structures, is just a mythological concept.

   People have a collective obligation to join a political community in
   which they subject themselves to a public law without losing their
   freedom. For the isolated individuals as such, this cannot be more than
   the ethical obligation to be willing to accept an external authority
   imposing legal rules. Within a given public legal order, this ethical
   obligation has been transformed into the legal obligation to respect
   positive law. In a state of anarchy, in a civil war, or in a state of
   nature, it is unclear how this ethical obligation has to be translated
   into concrete actions of obedience. It is only certain that we may not
   prevent the institution of a public order or make the existing legal
   system totally powerless. Under these exceptional circumstances, the
   collective duty, which only implies an ethical obligation for
   individuals, bestows a right on some individuals to take the initiative
   to impose a public order on others or, without the support of valid
   law, to enforce some changes in a given, but unjust, political order.
   In a state of public injustice, specific individuals who feel
   responsible for the public benefit have a right to exert a form of
   political violence that is not yet, or not any longer, in accordance
   with the legally defined and monopolised official mode of exerting
   political power. This is not a case of ethical obligation alone because
   the duty which is the object of political obligation can in some way be
   enforced by the people, either by legal, or by particularly political
   means such as refusal, resistance, and even revolt. In a democratic
   constitution, the right or obligation of citizens to revolt against
   injustices committed by the state can, pace Kant, legally be
   acknowledged, as the constitutions of some states of the German Federal
   Republic show. (7)

   Thus, political obligation seems to be a kind of obligation concerning
   the duties of political leaders and citizens together who, as a
   collectivity, are responsible for the political system as a whole. The
   domain of political obligation is situated between ethics and law. The
   moral worth of an action is primarily determined by the intentions of
   its agent, and the agent is only morally responsible for the effects of
   his action insofar as he can be considered a free cause of these
   effects and they could reasonably be foreseen. But a political agent
   will not be praised as a good politician only because his or her
   political actions are morally just or in perfect conformity with the
   law. Agents in the public service are supposed to exert themselves in
   favour of the public interest. Therefore, political responsibility
   requires not only the performance of correct actions, but also a will
   to uphold and improve the political system and a desire to perform
   successfully where the right action is not prescribed by law. This
   requirement of special political attitudes connects the concept of
   political responsibility with that of moral obligation and virtue. In
   cases of political responsibility, however, it is not good intentions
   but the results of the action which appear to count as the right
   criterion for its evaluation. From a purely political point of view,
   persons are judged mainly with respect to the external effects of their
   actions. Consequentialism seems an essential characteristic of
   political ethics, although it cannot provide ultimate criteria for
   moral judgement. (8)

   3. Political responsibility and democratic leadership

   Generally, I would say that citizens in a free democratic, or
   republican, political system have - even if there is no legal
   obligation - a political obligation to vote or to express in other ways
   their contentment or discontent with the policy of their government.
   Being a citizen in a democratic country is a privilege that, like
   nobility, obliges a person to develop political virtue and the
   willingness to assume, to some degree, political responsibility. A
   political leader with a great sense of responsibility for national
   interests and the safety of the state will feel obliged to do things
   that go far beyond the moral duties and rights of private persons in
   daily life. Taking great responsibilities is a praiseworthy thing in
   people who have the capacities to take them. Political merit
   presupposes some ingenuity in devising political goals and means and
   also the ability and courage to implement them. But under complex and
   uncertain circumstances, the real outcomes of political decisions and
   actions are often not predictable. The politician has to take risks. He
   will be praised when fortune favours him and blamed when it is against
   him. Good political actions seem to be much more determined by external
   contingencies than moral choice and virtue are. Therefore, it is
   rational that politicians can legally dispose of special means and
   powers to advance their purposes and to prevent or correct undesirable
   effects. This particular responsibility means a moral burden for the
   political agent, which is to a degree compensated by personal
   advantages such as a high income, privileges, and personal and social
   status. Most politicians enjoy the special power and status connected
   with their responsibility. Many politicians seem to strive for
   political positions because of these personal advantages. Political
   power, status, and privileges can easily be employed for the personal
   benefits of friends and family. To avoid corruption and unfair
   benefiting, the obligations of public offices must be clearly defined.

   Public servants have an official duty to do what the legal political
   system wants. They have this duty insofar as they themselves are a
   functional part of the system. This functional relationship is not
   characterised by what I would call a lien of political obligation,
   because its duties are defined by formal rules and legal obligation.
   The duty to perform their tasks in a formally prescribed impersonal and
   detached manner relieves civil servants of too many burdensome moral
   worries. But an excessive devotion to formal duty can also make
   officials blind to other moral requirements. Of course, corruption is
   objectionable. But our focus on corruption must not lead us to forget
   that a state can commit injustice through its most loyal servants. The
   public servant gets in touch with political obligation when, as a
   responsible citizen, he has to decide how far he has to adapt the
   execution of his formal tasks to the particular ends of the ruling
   party. Sometimes it will be relevant for him to make a political
   choice. The urgency to make political choices will be more frequent and
   less inevitable as the public servant occupies more leading and guiding
   positions or functions that are sensitive to political manipulation.
   Public servants in such positions are politically answerable for the
   choices they make or forsake to make. As stated previously, political
   obligation is connected with the notion of 'noblesse oblige'.
   Therefore, it appears reasonable that officials in leading positions
   can be held politically responsible for the effects of the political
   choices that they have made or have refused to make. How a person has
   to choose is determined by moral judgement, but the fact that he has to
   choose is a question of political obligation and courage.

   Leaders and citizens of rich and mighty nations have political
   responsibilities that go far beyond the security and well-being of
   their own nation-states. They have responsibilities to translate
   ethical obligations for global justice into adequate legal rules and
   economic measures. It is not unjust that people of other countries try
   to find political means by which they can induce the rich nations to
   take their responsibilities seriously. Today, many complaints can be
   heard about the deficiency of political leadership on the global level.
   Political leaders are said not to be active enough in stopping the
   massacres in African countries, or in finding solutions for the wars in
   eastern Europe and Asia. They are said to neglect their political
   responsibilities for lack of political courage. It is easy to utter
   such moral complaints, but it is not so easy to determine, within the
   contemporary situation of post-Cold War politics, what calling up
   political leaders to show courage requires of them. Demanding political
   courage in the abstract can be dangerous when connected with the
   widespread prejudice that mass democracy slackens the sense of moral
   responsibility and is an impediment to political courage.

   Democratic decision procedures are no obstacle to leadership. On the
   contrary, democracy has to be learned and requires continuous
   attentiveness. Leadership plays an important role in democracy, but it
   cannot be formalised into a command system with a descending order of
   subordination like the army or bureaucratic organisations. A democratic
   leader not only has to justify his political ends and actions to his
   fellow citizens, but he must also take political responsibility for
   promoting, within his own society, a moral sense of the value of
   democratic answerability. Democratic political virtue is allergic to
   utopian conceptions of political heroism and leadership. Democracy
   obliges leaders as well as citizens to develop more communicative
   political virtues and to be inventive in the search for other political
   means than enforcement by war and violence. In this concept of
   political virtue, a conception of political leadership that inclines
   towards a disapproval of democracy because it is too soft and thus
   unfit for the harshness of political necessities does is no longer
   suitable.

                          bluered.gif (1041 bytes)

   Notes

   (1) Agnes Heller, General Ethics, Oxford 1988, p. 48.

   (2) Michael Walzer, Political action: the problem of dirty hands, in :
   Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1973, pp. 160-180; Thomas Nagel, Mortal
   questions, Cambridge 1979, pp. 53-90; Bernard Williams, Moral Luck.
   Philosophical Papers 1973-1980, Cambridge 1981, pp. 54-70.

   (3) Kai Nielsen, There is no dilemma of dirty hands, in: South African
   Journal of Philosophy, 15-1 (1996), pp. 1-7.

   (4) Thomas Nagel, Mortal questions, p. 89.

   (5) See e.g. R.M. Hare, Political Obligation, in: Ted Honderich (ed.),
   Social Ends and Political Means, London 1976, pp. 1-12.

   (6) I. Kant, Die Metaphysik der Sitten, Akademie-Ausgabe, Berlin 1902,
   Bd VI, p. 232.

   (7) Cf. Peter Schneider, Recht und Macht, Gedanken zum modernen
   Verfassungsstaat, Mainz 1970, p. 224.

   (8) Cf. Bernard Williams, Consequentialism and Integrity, in: Samuel
   Scheffler (ed.), Consequentialism and its Critics, Oxford 1988, pp.
   20-50.

                          bluered.gif (1041 bytes)


   [3]Back to the Top

   20th World Congress of Philosophy Logo

   Paideia logo design by Janet L. Olson.
   All Rights Reserved


   [4]Back to the WCP Homepage

References

   1. https://www.bu.edu/wcp/MainPoli.htm
   2. mailto:H.H.H.vErp@kub.nl
   3. https://www.bu.edu/wcp/Papers/Poli/PoliVane.htm#top
   4. https://www.bu.edu/wcp/index.html
